Digital Twin for Structural Monitoring
and Anomaly Detection of
the JRC Atmospheric Tower
Gabriele David Bocchino1[0009−0005−6379−1254],
Giovanni Vaglica2󰂏[0009−0004−0162−3274], Graziano Renaldi2[0009−0002−6354−0808],
Federico Perotti1[0000−0003−4060−2527], Luca Martinelli1[0000−0003−1848−8764],
and Flavio Bono2[0000−0003−3670−2269]
1 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
2 European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Ispra 21027, Italy
flavio.bono@ec.europa.eu
Abstract. Structural Health Monitoring is essential in detecting struc-
tural anomalies and enhancing the reliability of structures. Installation
of sensors on existing and complex structures can be challenging, thus
preventing the implementation of exhaustive monitoring systems. The
development of structural digital twins, coupled with data from sensors,
can contribute to more eﬀective solutions, providing additional insights
on the monitored structures. This work demonstrates the potential of
digital twins for monitoring and identifying structural anomalies, by pre-
senting the development of an application for a 100 m-tall steel truss
atmospheric tower and base building. Operational Modal Analysis tech-
niques, based on continuously monitored structural vibrations, are im-
plemented to identify the dynamic parameters of the tower. This enables
the possible detection of structural anomalies and changes in the towers
modal response over time. The digital twin is then developed by com-
bining real-time data with the virtual representation of the structure.
We outline the details of the developed system, comprising the acqui-
sition system, the digital platform, and the solution for the integration
of the modular analysis components in the digital twin system architec-
ture. The importance of digital twins in detecting structural anomalies
during the life of the structure is here highlighted, demonstrating how it
can enable proactive maintenance and contribute in reducing the risk of
unexpected failures.
Keywords: Digital Twin · Dynamic Structural Response · Structural
Health Monitoring.
1
Introduction
Modern society evolved through the building of complex and interconnected
infrastructures that, while enabling greater eﬃciency and development, also
󰂏External consultant

2
G.D. Bocchino et al.
present management and maintenance challenges to guarantee service reliability
and prevent critical component failures. Concern over the structural integrity of
high-rise structures, such as wind turbines, electricity transmission or telecom-
munications towers, has grown because of their widespread use and crucial role in
networked infrastructures. These types of constructions are typically lattice steel
structures, often exposed to severe environmental loads due to extreme winds
and temperatures. Such loads, worsened by climate change, can lead to varied de-
ﬂection shapes and potential failure locations. Additionally, long-term dynamic
loads are particularly dangerous for such tall and slender structures inducing
substantial dynamic behaviour that can lead to fatigue failure due to damage
accumulation [10]. Lattice steel structures are constructed through the bolted as-
sembly of steel members. A key concern in the maintenance of these structures
is associated with bolt loosening issues, which can occur under various types
of loading during their extended service life. As the bolts loosen, joint slips can
occur, possibly leading to changes in the dynamic response of the tower and, ulti-
mately, to an increased risk of failure [13][2, 7]. The adoption of Structural Health
Monitoring (SHM) strategies based on sensor measurements in combination with
Digital Twin (DT) solutions can provide valuable insights into the behaviour of
these complex structures, enabling early detection of potential issues and in-
forming proactive maintenance strategies to mitigate the risk of catastrophic
failures. The numerical analysis in a DT accurate model could compensate for
a small number of sensor installed on the physical counterpart [1]. This work
aims to demonstrate how the concept of a DT can enable the collection, analy-
sis, and aggregation of various sensor-collected data types in combination with
numerical models of physical structures towards enhanced infrastructural main-
tenance strategies. This work presents an DT solution, based on modular analysis
components and open-source tools, that integrates heterogeneous wireless sen-
sors, a digital platform, and a modular Finite Element Method (FEM)-based
architecture to enhance infrastructural maintenance strategies for a 100 m-tall
atmospheric tower at the Joint Research Centre (JRC).
2
Digital Twins in Civil Infrastructures
The concept of DTs, initially developed in the digital transformation of Industry
4.0, is linked to up-to-date digital replica of actual physical assets [8, 11] to pro-
vide improved insights on the functioning of the real-world components towards
enhanced operational eﬃciency, predictive maintenance strategies and simula-
tions. A DT can combine real-time and historical sensor data from a physical
asset, allowing the analysis of trends, patterns, and correlations that traditional
monitoring methods may not be able to identify.
DTs applied to civil structures include SHM systems that are traditionally
used for structural assessment and for the identiﬁcation of issues through sensors
monitoring and signal processing. However, the installation of sensors on exist-
ing complex structures like it is the case in existing bridges or tall structures
can be challenging. When combined with numerical analysis of the digital twin

Digital Twin of the JRC Atmospheric Tower
3
model, the ability to gain more information about the state of the structures
from a small number of sensors can be a fundamental tool for preventing failures
and providing guidance for maintenance interventions. Despite the promising
beneﬁts in DT developments and the increasing number of pilot applications
and digital platforms, several challenges still prevent wide implementation and
adoption. One of the primary obstacles to the development of DTs is the lack
Fig. 1: The 100 m-tall JRC Atmospheric Tower and base building at the EC JRC
in Ispra, Italy (left) and the correspondent FEM model adopted in the digital
twin solution (right).
of data standards and interoperability for eﬃcient information exchange across
various platforms and systems. Interoperability is also crucial in the adoption of
multiple analysis tools sharing common 3D models of the structure. Moreover,
many infrastructures are equipped with legacy monitoring systems that require
custom integration processes or that, in the case of proprietary solutions, may
prevent access to collected data with diﬀerent tools. Moreover, the creation of
innovative heterogeneous sensing technologies for SHM requires innovative meth-
ods, to integrate data from multiple sources and the diﬀerent technologies (e.g.
satellite monitoring data), which enable sensing and data processing [11], such
as cloud computing systems and Internet of Things (IoT) physical devices, in the
development of DTs. Scalability and complexity present additional challenges in
the implementation of DTs for infrastructures monitoring: the complex nature

4
G.D. Bocchino et al.
of civil structures often leads to high computational demands and challenges
in the scalability of such solutions, limiting the beneﬁts of enhanced real-time
monitoring and predictive analytics [9].
Another critical aspect is associated with the concept of a “true digital twin”,
expressed in [12], that highlights the importance of achieving an accurate model
and perform continuous updates to reﬂect the evolving condition of the physical
structure over its lifetime to ensure a reliable DT representation. The integra-
tion of model updating techniques, with mathematical and procedural aspects
presented in [5], is also envisaged in the developed DT architecture .
3
Case study
The JRC Atmospheric Tower (Fig. 1) is actually a 95 m-tall steel truss structure,
supported by a 5 m-tall reinforced concrete building. The tower’s core consists
of four vertical columns, arranged in a 4.75 m × 4.75 m square, made of cir-
cular hollow sections with joints connected by 12 bolts. The core columns are
surrounded by four outer columns, arranged in a 7.75 m × 7.75 m square. At an
elevation of 25 m, the outer columns are angled and converge to connect with
the inner core. The ﬂoors are formed by a grid-work of HEA140 beams, with a
ﬂoor every 5 m, and three alternating conﬁgurations.
Diagonal bracing tubes connect columns and ﬂoors. The stairs are made
of inclined UPN 80 proﬁles, and the parapets consist of framed plates with a
handrail and grilled plates.
The tower is anchored to the top of the base building through long bolts
embedded in concrete shoes, with two sets of 12 anchorage bolts arranged in
a circular pattern. The base building stands on a concrete foundation plate
supported by 91 deep piles.
The elevator mast is a trussed column, formed by modular elements with
a triangular plan, attached to the grid-work of beams at each ﬂoor level by a
tube element and speciﬁc bolted plates. An elevator cabin, with a 1.2 m × 1.2 m
ﬂoor and a height of 2 m, can travel along the whole height of the tower with a
combined weight of 650 kg.
4
Structural Monitoring System
The sensor monitoring system is designed to acquire vibration data from the
tower continuously. The system consists of three solar-powered autonomous G-
link 200-OEM wireless accelerometers (Fig. 2), with a detachable antenna and
engineered enclosure, positioned at various tower levels (100 m, 80 m, 60 m).
Additional sensors have recently been installed at the lower levels (40 m and
20 m). These sensors acquire accelerations along three orthogonal axes, with z
aligned with the tower’s elevation, at a sampling rate of 64 Hz and employ a
lossless communication mode that aims at preventing data packet loss due to
interference. The sensor nodes use wireless communication with the network-
connected Microstrain WSDA-2000 gateway positioned at 60 m. In some cases,

Digital Twin of the JRC Atmospheric Tower
5
the communication between the node and the base station might be diﬃcult,
especially when the Received Signal Strength Indication (RSSI) is low. A reli-
able communication can be reached for RSSI values between 0 and −75 dBm. A
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2: Solar powered wireless accelerometer at 80 m: accelerometer sensor with
detachable antenna (left) and solar panel (right).
custom programme, based on the MSCL Libraries, manages the gateway and the
acquisition of all the data from the accelerometers mounted on the tower ensur-
ing clock synchronisation across all the sensor nodes. Data packets are compiled
and sent to an IoT Agent that forwards them to a centralised Context Broker
[4]. The Context Broker is in charge of storing the data in the database; in the
implemented solution, the daily acquisitions are stored in a primary database
and then transferred to a timeseries database. This strategy ensures high per-
formance of the system and eﬃcient historical data visualisation. The SHM also
integrates wind data measurements from sensors installed at 100 m and 40 m
by the JRC.C.5 Clean Air and Climate unit, providing additional information
of wind loads and directions.
5
Digital Twin System
The IT architecture (Fig. 3) developed at the JRC for the pilot application of the
Atmospheric Tower DT system consists in i) the sensor monitoring and the data
acquisition platform, ii) the SHM layer for signal processing and analysis, iii) the
DT layer and iv) the visualisation tools. The whole DT platform is designed to
integrate the sensor data with the FEM model, and to provide web applications
for monitoring and analysing the tower’s behaviour.

6
G.D. Bocchino et al.
Gateway
...
PHYSICAL LAYER
IoT
Agent
Main
System
Database
Layer
ANALYSIS LAYER
DIGITAL TWIN LAYER
FEM ANALYSES
Critical
Joints
Thermal
Effects
Fatigue
Analysis
acc2disp
OMA
...
RAW DATA
REPOSITORY
Digital Twin Simulations
Analysis Results
(Virtual Sensors)
Vibration
Wireless
Sensors
Wind
Sensors
VISUALIZATION LAYER
Digital Twin
3D Model
Web
Dashboard
s
analysis modules
FEA modules
100m
80m
60m
STRUCTURAL MODEL
Model
Mesh
Materials
Constraints
Fig. 3: Digital Twin system IT architecture.
5.1
Sensors Integration and Data Management
The physical sensors transmit wireless data streams to the Ethernet connected
gateway. Received data are converted to Ultralight (UL) format, a generic
lightweight text-based protocol, designed for devices and communications with
limited resources (e.g. device memory or bandwidth). The UL messages are en-
capsulated in Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) frames and for-
warded to an IoT Agent, that serves as a bridge between the physical layer and
the Context Broker (CB), the core hub of the platform which is used to inte-
grate and manage the data and the measurements from the IoT sensors. We
chose to use the open-source CB-based architecture for our application because
it is widely used in European Smart City projects and is a component of the
Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) building blocks. One of the goals of this work
is also to assess such component for SHM applications and the integration with
federated systems at larger scales. In addition, the CB is compliant with the
NGSI-LD standard that allows to support the interoperability and the scalabil-
ity within the same platform and across diﬀerent smart city or digital systems.
The CB stores all the received daily data in a relational database. Older data
are transferred to a timeseries database for improved performance in the man-
agement and visualisation of historical data. A web application allows the access
and visualisation of all the sensor measurements, both recent and historical with
custom dashboards.
5.2
Analysis Layer for Signal Processing
Signal processing is an essential part of SHM systems. In the implemented ar-
chitecture, the analysis layer allows the implementation of multiple analysis

Digital Twin of the JRC Atmospheric Tower
7
Fig. 4: Web dashboard with wind speed and vibrations (left) and wind sensors
data (right).
scripts developed with multiple technologies. In this implementation, we inte-
grate Python scripts to process vibration data acquired from the JRC Atmo-
spheric Tower. Other algorithms (diﬀerent scripting languages or compiled bi-
nary executables) can be easily implemented provided that a server-side engine
is capable of executing the analysis software components. Two analysis compo-
nents have been implemented at the moment for the analysis of the recordings of
the installed accelerometers: i) a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) vibration anal-
yser suitable for real-time applications and diagnostics of the modal response
of the structure over time, and ii) a vibration to displacement signal processing
algorithm (Fig. 5). Acceleration data from the sensor nodes at the diﬀerent levels
Fig. 5: Web dashboard with FFT variations (left) and daily computed displace-
ment (right).
are ﬁltered and processed to obtain estimates of the displacements. The results
of the analyses are considered as virtual sensors of the system, and provide addi-
tional information of the structure through signal analysis. In adherence to the
implemented IT architecture, virtual sensor data are sent to the IoT Agent for
the storing in the database by the Context Broker and the visualisation in the
web application dashboard.

8
G.D. Bocchino et al.
5.3
Digital Twin Integration and Numerical Analyses
The digital twin application is developed to combine a Finite Element Analysis
(FEA) component with real-world measurements from the installed sensors. In
our implementation we rely on Castem FEM model [3]. For the pilot application
we aim at applying real-world displacements, measured from the tower, to the
FEM model in order to identify the most stressed joints. This pilot application
analysis is representative of the processing and data ﬂow that can be used to
feed the FEM model with other inputs. The computed displacements are then
made available to the FEM model for the analysis. Castem is executed cyclically
in order to process the delivered data from the main system. At each execution,
the latest data are loaded by the FEM program and applied to the model as
imposed displacements. These are representative of the dynamics occurring on
the real-world structure as a consequence mainly of wind loads and thermal
deformations. The FEM analysis computes the stresses in the model’s joints and
exports all the transients as output. The output data from the FEM application
is sent back to the main system via the IoT Agent to be ingested and stored in
the main system databases, allowing quasi-immediate visualisation on the web
application dashboard.
5.4
Finite Element Model Analysis Modules
The FEM model of the building is developed using Castem software and is ﬁne-
tuned to accurately reproduce the behaviour of the tower and its response under
real loads and to perform simulations and in-depth analyses of structural com-
ponents. The FEM model is crucial to compensate and complement for limited
information from the installed sensors on the physical structure. The numerical
model of the JRC Atmospheric Tower is composed of 5959 elements with 4884
nodes. The two parts of the structure (i.e., the base building and the steel truss
tower) are modelled, although the displacements measured in correspondence of
the concrete slab supporting the base of the tower are negligible. In order to
have maximum ﬂexibility in developing diﬀerent analyses with the FEM model,
the main information of the model, i.e. i) the mesh and ii) the materials, models
and constraints, are stored separately. The DT layer allows for the storing of dif-
ferent FEA components; each module loads the general FEM structural model
and performs speciﬁc analyses based on real-world measurements from sensors
stored in the database layer. The main advantage of this approach is that mul-
tiple analyses can be performed independently with regular updates based on
the measured dynamics of the real structure. Additional measurements from the
numerical model are therefore possible and the results of simulations and anal-
yses are also considered, as per the analysis layer performing signal analysis, as
virtual sensors measurements. These are therefore transmitted to the IoT Agent
for standardised processing in the system and storage in the database layer.

Digital Twin of the JRC Atmospheric Tower
9
Fig. 6: Ampliﬁed deformed FEM JRC Tower 3D model visualisation based on
virtual sensor displacements.
5.5
Historical Data and FEM 3D Visualisation
One fundamental aspect of the FEM analyses lays in the possibility to visualise
the results in a 3D format with the option to display diﬀerent variables and
the deformed shape of the structure on the basis of the real-world measured
structural response. An interactive 3D model is therefore essential for the post-
processing evaluation by experts. In the designed solution, FEA results are saved
from Castem in the widely used VTK format. This format is deﬁned by Visual-
isation Toolkit, an open-source software software for processing and displaying
scientiﬁc data, volume rendering, 3D graphics, and image processing.
The advantage of using open standards for the FEA is that results can be
managed and visualised with multiple graphical applications. In the present DT
architecture, a web application based on Trame [6], a Python framework for web-
based interactive scientiﬁc visualisation of large data and 3D models oﬀering
possible integration with external Python libraries, VTK and ParaView back-
end, is integrated in the system. FEA output VTK ﬁles are saved by the multiple
DT modules and then transferred to the open-source data management system
(DMS). The DT 3D web application allows the listing and the selection of the
desired output results and the online interactive visualisation or the raw data
download for working with other compatible analysis and visualisation software.
An example application, developed for the JRC Atmospheric Tower DT, con-
sists in the analysis of the deformations occurred over time. From the measured
vibrations, the acc2disp module in the analysis layer calculates the displace-
ments; the results are then sent back to the IoT Agent for the subsequent Con-
text Broker processing and and storing into the data repositories to be available

10
G.D. Bocchino et al.
for and made available to FEM analyses. The FEM module wind load deforma-
tions loads the computed displacements at 100 m, 80 m and 60 m and applies
the real-world measurements as imposed displacements. The results are saved as
VTK ﬁle and the visualisation of the deformed shape with gradient colours cor-
respondent to the displacement of each structural component can be displayed
in the web application.
6
Conclusions
The development and implementation of a DT solution for the JRC Atmospheric
Tower demonstrates the potential of this technology to provide ﬂexible and scal-
able solutions in the ﬁeld of SHM for complex infrastructures. By integrating
real-time sensor data with numerical models and advanced analysis techniques,
DT can provide in-depth insights into the behaviour of critical structures towards
more eﬀective strategies for maintenance, thus reducing the risk of unexpected
failures. The proposed digital platform architecture demonstrates that DTs can
be eﬀectively implemented by integrating various open-source tools to monitor
the structural response of tall structures, such as the JRC Atmospheric Tower.
This approach enables the early detection of potential issues before they be-
come critical through the integration of modular signal processing and FEM
analysis components. Furthermore, the DT solution in this study addresses key
challenges related to interoperability, data standardisation, and scalability in the
development of DTs for infrastructure. Future research will focus on addressing
challenges associated with the complete structured execution of all DT solu-
tion processes to develop a fully standardised framework and on the continuous
validation and updating of DTs to ensure accurate and up-to-date numerical
models, ultimately enhancing the safety, eﬃciency, and sustainability of critical
infrastructure.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the valuable contributions of Alejandro Massaro Lat-
tuada and David Dardenne (JRC.R.I.4) for their support on the JRC Atmo-
spheric Tower structure, Anthoine Armelle and Pierre Pgon for their assistance
with Castem, and Giovanni Manca (JRC.C.5) for his contribution in integrating
wind sensors into the digital twin system.
References
1. Alexander
Krall,
D.F.,
Yang,
H.:
Virtual
sensing
network
for
statis-
tical
process
monitoring.
IISE
Transactions
55(11),
1103–1117
(2023).
https://doi.org/10.1080/24725854.2022.2148779
2. An, L., Wu, J., Jiang, W.: Experimental and numerical study of the axial stiﬀness
of bolted joints in steel lattice transmission tower legs. Engineering Structures 187,
490–503 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2019.02.070

Digital Twin of the JRC Atmospheric Tower
11
3. Castem: Castem. http://www-cast3m.cea.fr
4. Fiware: Fiware. https://www.ﬁware.org/
5. Haseeb, A., Bocchino, G.D., Bono, F., Perotti, F., Martinelli, L.: Finite element
model updating for digital twin development using operational modal analysis:
the jrc atmospheric observatory tower case study. In: EVACES 2025. EVACES
2025, 11th international Conference on Experimental Vibration Analysis of Civil
Engineering Structures, EVACES 2025 (2025)
6. Kitware:
Trame.
https://www.kitware.com/trame-revolutionizing-visual-
analytics-with-python/
7. Lao, W., Cui, C., Zhang, D., hua Zhang, Q., Bao, Y.: Computer vision-based
autonomous method for quantitative detection of loose bolts in bolted con-
nections of steel structures. Structural Control and Health Monitoring (2023),
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258926545
8. Mihai, S., Yaqoob, M., Hung, D.V., Davis, W., Towakel, P., Raza, M., Kara-
manoglu, M., Barn, B., Shetve, D., Prasad, R.V., Venkataraman, H., Trestian,
R., Nguyen, H.X.: Digital twins: A survey on enabling technologies, challenges,
trends and future prospects. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 24(4),
2255–2291 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2022.3208773
9. Parida, L., Moharana, S.: Current status and future challenges of digital twins
for structural health monitoring in civil infrastructures. Engineering Research
Express 6(2), 022102 (may 2024). https://doi.org/10.1088/2631-8695/ad4aea,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2631-8695/ad4aea
10. Repetto,
M.P.,
Solari,
G.:
Wind-induced
fatigue
collapse
of
real
slen-
der
structures.
Engineering
Structures
32(12),
3888–3898
(Dec
2010).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2010.09.002
11. Shahzad, M., Shaﬁq, M.T., Douglas, D., Kassem, M.: Digital twins in built en-
vironments: An investigation of the characteristics, applications, and challenges.
Buildings 12(2) (2022). https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings12020120
12. Tygesen, U.T., Jepsen, M.S., Vestermark, J., Dollerup, N., Pedersen, A.: The True
Digital Twin Concept for Fatigue Re-Assessment of Marine Structures. In: Vol-
ume 1: Oﬀshore Technology. p. V001T01A021. American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Madrid, Spain (Jun 2018). https://doi.org/10.1115/OMAE2018-77915
13. Zhao,
Y.,
Xiao,
Y.,
Wang,
H.,
Wang,
T.,
Wu,
C.,
Zhang,
B.:
Eﬀect
of bolt tightening force on the transmission tower modal parameters and
a method for looseness identiﬁcation. Energy Reports 7, 842–849 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2021.09.190
