Citation: Salazar-Lopez, J.R.;
Millan-Almaraz, J.R.;
Gaxiola-Camacho, J.R.;
Vazquez-Becerra, G.E.; Leal-Graciano,
J.M. GPS-Based Network
Synchronization of Wireless Sensors
for Extracting Propagation of
Disturbance on Structural Systems.
Sensors 2024, 24, 199. https://doi.org/
10.3390/s24010199
Academic Editors: Alexander Sim
and Jinoh Kim
Received: 26 October 2023
Revised: 24 December 2023
Accepted: 26 December 2023
Published: 29 December 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
GPS-Based Network Synchronization of Wireless Sensors for
Extracting Propagation of Disturbance on Structural Systems
Jesus Ricardo Salazar-Lopez 1, Jesus Roberto Millan-Almaraz 2,*
, Jose Ramon Gaxiola-Camacho 3,*
,
Guadalupe Esteban Vazquez-Becerra 4
and Jesus Martin Leal-Graciano 3
1
Department of Computer Science, Autonomous University of Sinaloa, Culiacan 80013, Mexico;
jesusricardo@uas.edu.mx
2
Department of Physics and Mathematics, Autonomous University of Sinaloa, Culiacan 80040, Mexico
3
Department of Civil Engineering, Autonomous University of Sinaloa, Culiacan 80040, Mexico;
jesusleal@uas.edu.mx
4
Department of Earth and Space Sciences, Autonomous University of Sinaloa, Culiacan 80040, Mexico;
gvazquez@uas.edu.mx
*
Correspondence: jrmillan@uas.edu.mx (J.R.M.-A.); jrgaxiola@uas.edu.mx (J.R.G.-C.);
Tel.: +52-667-136-2869 (J.R.M.-A.); +52-667-127-8230 (J.R.G.-C.)
Abstract: Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have gained a positive popularity for structural health
monitoring (SHM) applications. The underlying reason for using WSNs is the vast number of devices
supporting wireless networks available these days. However, some of these devices are expensive.
The main objective of this paper is to develop a cost-effective WSN based on low power consumption
and long-range radios, which can perform real-time, real-scale acceleration data analyses. Since a
detection system for vibration propagation is proposed in this paper, the synchronized monitoring of
acceleration data is necessary. To meet this need, a Pulse Per Second (PPS) synchronization method
is proposed with the help of GPS (Global Positioning System) receivers, representing an addition
to the synchronization method based on real-time clock (RTC). As a result, RTC+PPS is the term
used when referring to this method in this paper. In summary, the experiments presented in this
research consist in performing specific and synchronized measurements on a full-scale steel I-beam.
Finally, it is possible to perform measurements with a synchronization success of 100% in a total of
30 samples, thereby obtaining the propagation of vibrations in the structure under consideration by
implementing the RTS+PPS method.
Keywords: wireless sensor networks; pulse per second; synchronization; GPS; real-time clock;
structural health monitoring; acceleration; disturbance propagation
1. Introduction
Nowadays, one of the most important philosophies used to assess the integrity of
infrastructure is the well-known Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) approach [1]. Such
a technique can be used to detect invisible or hidden damage that may be present in
structures. Within this context, one of the main goals of the SHM philosophy is to detect
unexpected changes in the main characteristics of structures, considering, in most of the
cases, differences among the signals obtained by different sensors. As a result, the severity
of the damage can be detected even in complex structural configurations [1]. In recent
years, the SHM philosophy has been implemented in several structures around the world
to prevent possible threats due to the inadequate structural condition that some structures,
particularly the old ones, may be presenting. In general, the SHM of infrastructure can
be implemented in different ways, and it can be defined as the detection and evaluation
of damage in structures. Thus, the main objective of SHM can be established to be the
estimation of structural damage to prevent a possible failure of structures, which may
result in human and economic losses. Damage prevention by implementing SHM is
Sensors 2024, 24, 199. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24010199
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
2 of 20
essential since it provides safety in both construction and maintenance of structures. In
this frame of reference, in the study published in [2], a comprehensive review of the SHM
philosophy is carried out. In general terms, the current methods for structural monitoring
and their advantages and disadvantages are reported. In addition, a particular emphasis is
given to this aspect by considering the Internet of Things (IoT) approach. Finally, in this
paper, the IoT technology is described as an option to establish communication between
all of them, providing easy access to information of vital importance for SHM. Based on
this discussion, it can be reported that SHM is utilized in several engineering disciplines
such as civil, maritime, mechanical, military, etc. [3]. In the following paragraphs of this
introductory section, a particular technical review on the SHM philosophy as well as its
main implementations on the monitoring of several infrastructure systems are presented.
The dynamic response or vibration of structures generally propagates in the form
of elastic waves, which implies that the study of wave propagation in structures can
reveal the structural dynamic characteristics of the response and may provide the required
information for proper structural design and control [4]. Based on what is reported in [5],
in the SHM philosophy, there exist different techniques that can be used to detect damage
in structures. In general, two procedures can be implemented for damage detection. These
procedures are destructive and non-destructive tests, respectively. In [5], the authors
highlighted the importance of tests that do not damage the structures and categorize the
different techniques that exist to perform them. Some of the most popular sensors to
register the dynamic response of bridges are GPS (Global Positioning System) devices and
accelerometers. Both are widely used in the literature to compute the dynamic characteristic
of structures and to predict possible damages on them. Thus, the integration of them in
the form of a wireless node may represent an improvement to the SHM philosophy or an
alternative to the usual instrumentation implemented in this philosophy. A significant
benefit of implementing wireless nodes is their easy installation on structures whose
configuration makes cable handling a real challenge.
The calculation of the dynamic response of structures using the GPS technology is
still under development. Although several investigations on this topic exist [6], there are
some drawbacks and problems such as multipath errors due to the presence of atmospheric
effects. In addition, in most of the cases, it is necessary to use more than one GPS device
to determine the position of a point if a millimeter precision is required. This is generally
performed implementing the Real-Time Kinematic (RTK) technique. The implementation
of this approach, alongside the use of GPS technology in SHM philosophy, has been widely
reported in the literature [6–11].
The structural monitoring process of a bridge structure can be a complex task. It
is mainly difficult because of the structural characteristics that they may present. For
instance, some bridges present very long spans, which represents a real challenge to the
installation of sensors and devices. In the case of cable-stayed bridges, acceleration sensors
and the well-known strain gauges are generally installed on critical points of structures.
Thus, installing wired sensors becomes a very difficult process. Given these scenarios,
IoT wireless communication technologies have been developed. For example, in [12],
the advantages of using wireless sensors on a railway bridge are discussed. The study
presented in [13] describes the implementation of a complete IoT platform for a SHM
procedure. The platform uses a combination of hardware and software to remotely collect,
process, and transmit monitoring data from structures. This represents an opportunity
for implementing alternative sensors to extract the structural response of bridges. As an
option, the development of cost-effective wireless sensors, in the form of nodes using
ZigBee radios with low power consuming piezoelectric sensors [14], represents a step in
the right direction in SHM philosophy.
Recent wireless technologies such as LoRa and LoRaWAN have been developed for
low power consumption and long-range communication. Furthermore, the LoRa protocol
was utilized in [15], where a wireless monitoring system based on LoRa was developed,
resulting in a cost-effective implementation. As an alternative to the above-mentioned

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
3 of 20
studies, in this paper, different Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) are implemented, mainly
based on 915 MHz radio. These radios present a long range and minimize energy consump-
tion simultaneously [16]. Thus, a unique energy autonomy can be achieved. Additionally,
Wi-Fi can be implemented to make transfers between devices considering the files gener-
ated by the datalogger. Another component incorporated to the devices developed during
this research work is the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) as reported
in [17]. However, using such a service requires payment of a fee, which represents one of
its limitations. For instance, in this case, data must be reloaded, and a cell phone number
must be assigned to every node.
The study of acceleration or vibration is another relevant method to compute the
dynamic performance of structures [6,18,19]. However, most of the research on vibration
extraction is developed with the help of acceleration devices or vibrometers. In most of
the cases, such devices are utilized for industrial applications which may be an expensive
method. Thus, the use of expensive vibrometers is exclusive for a sector of society that can
afford it. As an alternative to the above-mentioned device, there are other sensors, perhaps
less sensitive but accurate enough to achieve a solid resolution that could be used in SHM
philosophy. An example of these sensors are the Micro Electronic Mechanical System
(MEMS) accelerometers. MEMSes are composed by microscopic elements that can fold,
expand, move, and basically perform any type of movement in a microscopic environment;
hence, accelerometers that use this technology are generally built with a “spring mass”
system where a metal plate moves between two points generating energy every time
the plates touch each other. To determine the acceleration, these accelerometers use the
time it takes for the mass to move. These electronic devices are microscopic, and they
are extremely sensitive to movements that can be recorded with a pinpoint accuracy [20].
Some studies have reported that MEMS accelerometers are suitable for monitoring in cases
where the acceleration rate is used to detect fatigue and structural failures [21–24]. Even
in [25], the design, fabrication, simulation, and measurement of a single-axis piezoelectric
MEMS accelerometer sensor based on the aerosol deposition of a layer of piezoelectric
material (PZT) is presented. In addition, there are some other technical studies reporting
the calculation of the quasi-static behavior of structures by the integration of vibration and
inclination data [26]. The above-mentioned publications endorse the importance of MEMS
accelerometers for SHM techniques. In the case of this paper, a novel acceleration sensor is
developed to be implemented in the SHM of structures. Within this context, a MPU9250
sensor was chosen, since it had already been validated in [27], by making a comparison
through monitoring under equal conditions with a piezotronics 352C03 [28].
Since the dynamic response of structures propagates in the form of waves, it is impor-
tant to measure such a propagation to detect how these waves are distributed along the
structure under consideration. The extracted data coming from structural wave monitoring
can be subsequently post processed to obtain important structural health data. These data
can be obtained by implementing mathematical methods such as polynomial regression
or modern approaches as machine learning [29]. The latter can be used to detect whether
external factors such as the change in speed of a railway causing tension and considerable
deformations on the tracks. In general, if the propagation of waves is known, it may be
possible to compute the tension and/or torsion being applied to the tracks, and therefore
their deformations [30]. In this regard, it is necessary to measure and establish the propaga-
tion of vibration of structures to prevent failures. However, the synchronization of all the
nodes in the system employed to carry out the monitoring process at the beginning of the
measurement is fundamental to achieve the above-mentioned computations. If this last
condition is not met, the travel time of vibration waves is lost, and the monitoring process
must be restarted. As a result of this last situation, different synchronization techniques
have been proposed to implement when obtaining sound measurements. Examples of such
techniques are the Reference broadcast Synchronization (RBS) [31], Time Sync Protocol for
sensor Network (TPSN) [32], Flooding Time Synchronization Protocol (FTSP) [33], Pulse
Per Second Sync (PPS) [34,35], Flooding with Clock Speed agreement (FCSA) [36], gradient

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
4 of 20
time synchronization protocol (GTSP) [37], etc. Based on the study documented in [38],
the existence of an error between pulses of approximately ±400 ns was found; however, it
turns out to be the best synchronization method, since the wireless system can be easily
implemented on it.
In summary, a monitoring system was developed in this research using a GPS receiver
to extract the PPS, and a synchronization approach is integrated between wireless, low
power consumption, and long-range monitoring nodes. The implementation of the method
was validated with the help of an experiment through which the propagation of vibrations
on a steel I-beam was obtained. Within this context, the fundamental frequency of the
beam was extracted as well. Based on the results, it was more than clear than this method
represents a viable contribution to the SHM philosophy.
2. Materials and Methods
To carry out the monitoring of vibration propagation, it was imperative to develop a
system to detect mechanical vibrations. Within this frame of reference, the research team
decided to synchronize wireless nodes through the RTC+PPS method. The datalogger
utilized in the proposed system is centered around the System on a Chip (SoC) ESP
WROOM 32 by Espressif Systems, hereafter referred as simply ESP32. The extracted
measurements are executed at a rate of 100 samples per second, utilizing Invensense
MP9250, which is a 3-axis MEMS accelerometer. This accelerometer also integrates a 3-axis
gyroscope and magnetometer. Furthermore, to connect the MPU9250 acceleration sensor to
ESP32 SoCs, four category 5 UTP cables were used. To ensure that the SPI communication,
operating at a transmission frequency of 4 MHz, does not experience data loss during the
transfer through the cables, their length was set to fifty centimeters. The acquired data were
stored in the ESP32’s RAM memory, which had a capacity of 520 KB for sketches. These
data sets were transmitted via the RFM69 module, a long-range radio operating system
working at a frequency of 915 MHz. Table 1 describes in detail each of the components
from the monitoring node.
Figure 1 illustrates an example of the PCB (Printed Circuit Board) card of one of the
nodes where the sensor, the RTC, the GPS, and the SoC are connected. In this experiment,
two of these nodes were used to perform the monitoring synchronization; these nodes are
called monitoring nodes or client nodes within the RTC+PPS synchronization system.
 
Figure 1. Monitoring node and its components.

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
5 of 20
Table 1. Characteristics comprising the body of a monitoring node.
Component
Model
Technical Characteristic
Functionality
SoC
Espressif ESP WROOM
32, Espressif Systems,
China
CPU: Dual core Tensilica Xtensa LX6 (32 bit).
It is the primary System on a
Chip (SoC) responsible for
running the monitoring
program.
Clock frequency: 240 MHz.
Voltage: 3.3 V DC, 80~500 mA.
40 GPIO.
Memory: 4 MB Flash, 520 KB RAM.
Wireless: 2.4 GHz IEEE 802.11 b/g/n and Bluetooth 4.1.
Accelerometer
Module
InvenSense MPU9250
Triple-axis MEMS accelerometers.
It is the triaxial acceleration
sensor, responsible for
conducting monitoring at a
sampling frequency of 100 Hz.
Scale programmable ±2 g, ±4 g-force, ±8 g and ±16 g.
16 bits ADC.
Normal current operation: 450 µA.
Low accelerometer mode current: 8.4 µA at 0.98 Hz, 19.8 µA at
31.25 Hz.
Sleep mode current: 8 µA.
GPS module
u-blox Neo 6M
Horizontal Position Accuracy: ±2.5 m
It is the GPS receiver that
provides the PPS signal used
for synchronizing the
monitoring system.
Communication Protocol:
NMEA, UBX Binary, RTCM
Navigation Sensitivity: −161 dBm.
Operating Voltage.
Provides PPS signal.
RTC module
Microchip MCP7940N
Real-time Clock/Calendar (RTCC):
Hours, minutes, Second, Day of week, Day, Month, Year
It is the RTC responsible for
the timestamp of each of the
monitoring stored in local
memory.
Oscillator for 32.768 kHz Crystals:
Optimized for 6–9 pF crystal
On-Chip Digital Trimming/Calibration:
±1 PPM resolution
±129 PPM range
Wireless Module
HoperF Electronics RF
Module RFM69HWC
+13 dBm Power Output Capability
It is the radio used for
wireless communication, with
a range of +200 m in a straight
line while utilizing low power
consumption.
High Sensitivity: down to −120 dBm at 1.2 kbps
High Selectivity: 16-tap FIR Channel Filter
Programmable Pout: −18 to +13 dBm in 1 dB steps
FSK Bit rates up to 300 kb/s
FSK, GFSK, MSK, GMSK and OOK modulations
115 dB + Dynamic Range RSSI
Packet engine with CRC-16, AES-128, 66-byte FIFO
The monitoring and receiving node, respectively, are equipped with a synchronization
method based on an MCP7940 Real-Time Clock (RTC) and a Global Positioning System
(GPS) providing a PPS signal. The method involves the use of an RTC to generate a “trigger
time” which is sent from the receiving node (now referred to as the master node) to all
monitoring nodes. After receiving the trigger time from the master node, the monitoring
nodes wait 10 s and then anticipate a PPS signal. These nodes receive this PPS signal at the
same time, thereby guaranteeing the synchronization required between nodes.
The system also encompasses a receiving node where data from the monitoring nodes
are stored in a simple comma-separated value (.csv) text file. At its core, this node can
be seen in Figure 2 and employs a Raspberry Pi 3 Model B SoC. It is equipped with a
64 GB micro-SD memory card for local storage, featuring 2.4 GHz wireless communication
compliant with IEEE 802.11 b/g/n and Bluetooth 4.1. Additionally, it includes 40 general-
purpose input/output (GPIO) pins. Table 2 describes in detail each of the components of
the master node.
The algorithm to perform the monitoring process is designed within the Arduino
environment which is compatible with ESP32 SoC boards where only “Wire.h”, “SPI.h”,
and “RFM69.h” were utilized as libraries for the end node firmware development. Each of
the tasks for performing measurements is separated into functions. The system operates
as follows: the master node sends a trigger signal containing the exact time when the
measurement was recorded. This signal is compared by the monitoring nodes, and when
the specified 10 s time interval elapses, monitoring begins for 30 s. This method is called
RTC+PPS monitoring synchronization system. Once the monitoring process is completed,
the monitoring nodes enter on a standby mode. The master node sends a request signal

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
6 of 20
to initiate data reception from the monitoring nodes, starting with Node i. Each node
starts transmitting data in batches of 60 bytes. Upon completing the transmission, each
node sends a termination signal. As the master node receives data from Node i, it stores
the data in RAM and proceeds to request data from Node i + 1. The process continues,
with the master node sequentially receiving from all nodes and storing data in RAM.
Subsequently, the master node combines lower and higher bytes, forming 16-bit strings
for each measurement. Finally, all the data are stored in local memory for subsequent
processing. This process is described in detail in Figure 3.
 
Figure 2. Master node and its components.
Table 2. Characteristics comprising the body of a node master.
Component
Model
Feature
Functionality
Raspberry Pi
Raspberry Pi model 3 B,
Raspberry Pi
Foundation, UK
Quad Core 1.2 GHz Broadcom BCM2837 64 bit CPU.
RAM: 1 GB LPDDR2. GPIO: 40 pins.
USB Ports: 4 × USB 2.0.
Micro SD port for loading the operating system and storing
data.
Networking: 10/100 Ethernet, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth.
It serves as the central
processing unit for data
collection and processing.
GPS module
u-blox Neo 6M
Horizontal Position Accuracy: ±2.5 m
Communication Protocol:
NMEA, UBX Binary, RTCM
Navigation Sensitivity: −161 dBm.
Operating Voltage.
Provides PPS signal.
It is the GPS receiver that
provides the PPS signal used
for synchronizing the
monitoring system.
RTC module
Microchip MCP7940N
Real-time Clock/Calendar (RTCC):
Hours, minutes, Second, Day of week, Day, Month, Year
The RTC is responsible for the
timestamp of each of the
monitoring stored data in
local memory.
Oscillator for 32.768 kHz Crystals:
Optimized for 6–9 pF crystal
On-Chip Digital Trimming/Calibration:
±1 PPM resolution
±129 PPM range
Wireless Module
HoperF Electronics RF
Module RFM69HWC
+13 dBm Power Output Capability
The radio used for wireless
communication, with a range
of +200 m in a straight line
while utilizing low power
consumption.
High Sensitivity: down to −120 dBm at 1.2 kbps
High Selectivity: 16-tap FIR Channel Filter
Programmable Pout: −18 to +13 dBm in 1 dB steps
FSK Bit rates up to 300 kb/s
FSK, GFSK, MSK, GMSK and OOK modulations
115 dB + Dynamic Range RSSI
Packet engine with CRC-16, AES-128, 66-byte FIFO
+13 dBm Power Output Capability

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
7 of 20
Figure 3. Flowchart of the RTC+PPS monitoring synchronization system.

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
8 of 20
3. Validation
3.1. Accelerometer
In the M.S. thesis of the first author, the MPU9250 sensor was validated through a
comparison with the help of a Piezotronics 352C03 sensor; more information can be found
in [27]. In summary, for validation, the sensors were positioned at the same distance on a
steel beam with a type I cross-section. The beam was excited by a shake at one of its ends,
and its spectrum was obtained implementing a Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT). Figure 4
presents the obtained response of the beam considering the above-mentioned sensors.
In general, in Figure 4, it can be observed the response of the beam being monitored by
both sensors (MPU9250 and Piezotronics 352C03). It is interesting to observe that both
synchronized signals overlay very well with each other. A very similar response and
tendency is detected. The reason why the red signal exhibits a larger wave is due to its
resolution being configured at ±16 g, while the blue signal is set at ±8 g. Nonetheless, both
signals exhibit the same behavior at their respective times.
Figure 4. Comparison data between acceleration sensors through sine wave excitation [27].
Figure 5 illustrates the FFT obtained considering the MPU9250 and 352C03 sensors,
respectively. In other words, Figure 5 illustrates the response spectrum of both sensors.
the frequencies of both signals are observed as well; the signal in red corresponds to
the MPU9250 sensor and the signal in blue to the 352C03 sensor. In addition, in both
cases, the highest responses are located at the same frequency to that of the fundamental
frequency of the beam under study. Based on these results, it can be established that the
Invensense MPU9250 and the piezotronics 352C03 sensor extract very similar responses in
the frequency domain. In general, both sensors have the same capabilities to extract the
fundamental frequency of the beam; therefore, it is evident that the Invensense MPU9250
sensor is suitable for the extraction of structural data to calculate dynamic characteristics of
structures using vibration waves.
3.2. Signal RTC+PPS
One of the greatest challenges for the signal RTC+PPS experiment was to achieve the
initial synchronization for the monitoring nodes. The way they were initially programmed
did not account for this synchronization from the outset. Despite this, monitoring was
being conducted in laboratory tests, resulting in data from both sensors. However, it was
not possible to determine which node was initiating the measurement. Thus, to identify
signal propagation, synchronization of the data was necessary.
To address this issue, the synchronization method proposed in [34] was employed.
This method involves using the PPS signal provided by a GPS and utilizing it as a trigger
signal for data synchronization. The method is quite straightforward. From the Ublox Neo
6M GPS, a PPS signal output is available—a pulse with a frequency of 1 s. This signal is
satellite-synchronized, resulting in precise timing accuracy. However, according to [34],
this method is not sufficient for achieving synchronization in all measurements. In this
sense, there are instances of exact synchronization and others that are not synchronized
due to the nature of microcontrollers. Then, they need to start at the exact same time from

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
9 of 20
the beginning. To address this, another long-standing technology for synchronization, the
real-time clock, was implemented.
The main issue of data desynchronization arises because, at times, the triggering of
monitoring experiences a time shift of around ±1 s. This results in imprecise synchroniza-
tion. Consequently, an RTC controller was installed to address this problem. By controlling
the start time of monitoring, it becomes possible to regulate each monitoring instance. The
algorithm operates as follows. Initially, the exact time is unknown for each sensor. In con-
trast, for the master node, it is merely a matter of requesting the system time. Subsequently,
the master node transmits the exact time via radio to all monitoring nodes simultaneously.
Now, for each node within the system, based on the registered time, an alarm is set ten
seconds after the time provided by the master node. This mitigates the time discrepancy, as
if the request falls within the interval of a second, it is impossible that the PPS signal will
be encountered at the end of the countdown. In such cases, the node is simply put into a
standby mode, activating the monitoring function upon receiving the PPS signal, this is
illustrated in Figure 6.
Figure 5. Comparison of MPU9250 and 352C03 sensors in the frequency domain [27].
Figure 6. Execution time of the GPS trigger-based monitoring.
With the help of the above-mentioned approach, it is possible to guarantee that each
of the measurements will be synchronized, eliminating the need to record unsynchronized
monitoring measurements. Nevertheless, since the entire system relies on a GPS receiver

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
10 of 20
module, it is influenced by environmental conditions. Therefore, it is not recommended to
conduct monitoring under cloudy skies or near structures that might cause GPS signal loss.
With the aim to validate the accuracy of the presented approach, a laboratory test was
conducted where, for each measurement, a 20 µs pulse was sent. Each sensor was connected
to an oscilloscope terminal, and monitoring was performed. In Figure 7A, desynchronized
data can be observed, whereas in Figure 7B, synchronized data using the RTC+PPS method
are displayed.
 
Figure 7. Comparison between unsynchronized system (A) and synchronized system using the
RTC+PPS method (B).
3.3. Radio RFM69
To validate the RFM69 radio module, a low-power prototype based on two radios was
designed and constructed. Radio 1 was configured as a data transmitter; then, data were
sent which is originated from the reading of a variable resistor. On the other hand, Radio 2
was set in receiver mode and continuously received real-time data.
The experiment illustrated in Figure 8 aimed to test the signal loss between Radio 1
and 2. To determine if the signal was lost, a 128 × 64 OLED was implemented to display the
received data. Hence, if the signal was lost, the display showed “NO SIGNAL”. However,
despite increasing the distance between the sensors, the connection remained uninterrupted.
This result was obtained in a scenario without buildings and where the signal path between
the radios was always in a straight line. The experiment was conducted on the running
track in the main campus of the Autonomous University of Sinaloa in Mexico. The location
with the longest available distance did meet the mentioned criteria. The maximum distance
achieved was approximately 206 m, as represented in Figure 8. Based on this last fact, an
important observation can be stated as follows. Since bridges where these devices were
planned to be implemented have spans of less than 200 m approximately, it is feasible the
use of them to monitor the structural behavior of those structures.

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
11 of 20
 
Figure 8. Distance between two RFM69 radios on the campus running track 24◦49′28′′ N 107◦22′53′′
W of the Autonomous University of Sinaloa in Culiacan, Mexico.
3.4. Data Integrity
One issue encountered during data transmission is occasional data corruption, where
some of the data are not transmitted correctly. To address this problem, it is necessary to
activate the ACK response function. Next, an example of how it works in a point-to-point
radio system is introduced.
In a system composed of two radios, with Radio 1 configured as the transmitter and
Radio 2 as the receiver, Radio 1 sends a message to Radio 2. Upon receiving the message
correctly, Radio 2 sends an ACK message back to Radio 1. If Radio 1 receives this ACK
message, it acknowledges that the transmission was successful and completed. However, if
ACK is not received by Radio 1 within a 100 ms period, it cancels the entire transmission
and displays an error message on the screen. Radio 1 remains in a waiting mode until
a user presses the RESET button on the SoC ESP32. This mechanism helps ensure data
integrity and prompt error detection during the transmission process.
This function is incorporated into the monitoring system; specifically, this condition is
active in all nodes to ensure that no nonexistent data are present in transmissions. At this
point, the entire chain of acceleration data can be expected to reach from each node to the
master node. Therefore, the method used to send the data is as follows:
Upon initiating the monitoring process, all data corresponding to a 30 s measurement
are stored in a character string. It is important to note that the MPU9250 sensor has a
resolution of 16 bits for each axis of acceleration. Now, the SPI port only allows transmission
with each message composed of 8 bits. As a result, the complete message is divided into
two parts: the Most Significant Bits (MSB) and the Least Significant Bits (LSB). The MSB
contains the most significant bits of the data, and the LSB contains the least significant bits.
It is crucial to transmit this message correctly to prevent data corruption.
The structure of a six-message, 8-bit packet is as follows: MSB_X, LSB_X, MSB_Y,
LSB_Y, MSB_Z, and LSB_Z, respectively. This batch of 6 bytes is sent in a single 60-byte
chain. It is then complemented with the next nine measurements and sent in batches of
60 characters, one by one, until the entire chain is transmitted. With knowledge of the
chain’s structure, the message can be decoded, and all acceleration data can be restructured
in the master node. This method ensures the proper and organized transmission and
reception of data from each node to the master node.
To correctly decode the message, it is important to understand that the MPU9250
delivers data in binary format using the complement of two. This means that the most
significant bit corresponds to the sign of the number, which can be negative or positive. As
it is a 16-bit chain, the sensor provides data ranging from −32,768 to 32,767.

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
12 of 20
With this understanding, the data can be easily transformed from raw to acceleration
by performing a simple division. With the help of the sensitivity setting of the sensor, in
the case of ±16 g, the desired real-world value in signed decimal format (x) value must be
derived as follows:
x =
dv
32767 × S,
(1)
where dv is the digital value in binary two’s complement; S is the sensitivity of sensor in
this case equal to 16.
4. Full-Scale Experiment
The experimental part of this paper consisted of the structural monitoring of a steel
beam with a type I cross-section. The beam was simply supported in two points along its
length. The distance between the two supports was 2.6 m, and beyond the two supports in
both sides the beam was a cantilever part with a length of 0.1 m. Figure 9 illustrates the
configuration of the experiment.
 
Figure 9. Full-scale synchronization experiment.
The MPU9250 sensors were placed on the underside of the beam, 10 cm from each end
as illustrated in Figure 9. To determine the natural frequency, measurements were initially
taken at a 100 Hz sampling rate due to hardware limitations. However, the latest update of
the monitoring nodes resolved these limitations. Nonetheless, the measurements were still
conducted at 100 Hz as the code had already been configured for that sampling frequency.
For each monitoring conducted in this experiment, the beam was excited at one of its
ends to induce vibration in the structure, aiming to determine its fundamental frequency.
To excite the beam, a 200 g rubber mallet hammer is used to strike its end. The strike should
not be too forceful or too gentle. Through experimentation, it was determined that the
ideal strike is simply allowing the mallet fall under its own weight to hit the structure. This
ensures a moderate impact that is not overly powerful, yet not too feeble, considering the
low frequency of impact. Additionally, striking at the same point on the beam is crucial. To
achieve this, a target is placed at the designated point.
During the experiment, data were collected from 30 impacts on each side of the beam
under consistent conditions between 16:00 and 19:00 h of the day. This time frame was chosen
to minimize the impact of temperature on the structure, given that temperatures in Culiacan,
Mexico may reach up to 40 degrees Celsius. High temperatures could lead to metal expansion,
potentially causing variations in recorded frequencies during measurements.
5. Results
The objective of this study was to evaluate the performance of a wireless vibration
monitoring system implemented on a steel beam with a type I cross-section. The system
employed synchronized wireless nodes equipped with MPU9250 accelerometers, utilizing

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
13 of 20
the RTC+PPS synchronization method. A series of impact tests were conducted on the
beam’s end using a 200 g hammer, resulting in 30 monitored instances. The aim was to
assess the system’s ability to accurately capture and analyze structural vibrations.
5.1. Synchronization Success
The experiment began by assessing the effectiveness of the RTC+PPS synchronization
method. The results indicated a high degree of success, as data acquisition across all
monitored nodes was precisely coordinated. The synchronized data demonstrated minimal
time deviation, ensuring accurate timing alignment among the nodes. This synchronization
method was vital in establishing a consistent baseline for subsequent analyses. Figure 10
shows the signal belonging to one of the synchronized measurements in the experiment.
Figure 10. Example of synchronized monitoring session for both nodes with Impact at End A of
the beam.
5.2. Propagation Analysis
Propagation analysis was carried out by performing 30 acquisition tests of 1024 sam-
ples each that were organized as four statistical groups labeled as RTC+PPS sensor 1,
RTC+PPS sensor 2, Unsynchronized sensor 1 and Unsynchronized sensor 2. In addition,
these tests were performed twice, one for the case where the hammer impact comes from
Point A and a second group of 120 tests for the four groups where the impact comes
from Point B. As an example, Figure 11 shows the case where the hammer impact comes
from the A point of the beam. Based on this, the behavior of the structure as well as its
natural frequency can be extracted. As specified earlier, the impact is carried out using
a 200 g hammer. For each monitoring, only one impact is performed, so each statistical
group requires a total of 30 monitoring tests. Furthermore, a comparison is made between
synchronized and unsynchronized data.
 
Figure 11. Impact on End A of the beam.

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
14 of 20
In summary, Figure 11 provides an illustrative example of an impact on the beam.
Prior to delving into behavior analysis, it is essential to address certain signal intricacies.
Primarily, both signals initiate simultaneously, suggesting an absence of apparent propaga-
tion, at least in this monitoring instance. Consequently, a closer scrutiny of the signal is
requisite to accurately interpret the results.
As depicted in Figure 12, it is only upon closer inspection that propagation time can
be found, which is defined as the time it takes for the signal to arrive from Point A to Point
B on the I-beam. Since both sensors start monitoring at the same time, propagation time
can be understood as the phase delay between the start of the vibration behavior in the
acceleration signals from both nodes. The blue signal corresponds to Sensor 1 signal while
the red signal represents Sensor 2 signal.
Figure 12. Propagation time of Impact at End A of the I-Beam where the Node 1 is a blue signal and
Node 2 is a red signal.
Deeper analysis involving signal processing techniques is essential to unveil any
potential propagation trends that might be present in the data. These insights could hold
crucial information about the beam’s dynamic response to impact.
5.3. Spectrum Analysis
Figure 13 shows the spectrum of one of the results and a graph of these, omitting the
atypical values of the tests, demonstrating that the fundamental frequency of the I-beam
can be obtained by this method.
Figure 13. Monitoring of fundamental frequency of the I-beam, impact on A.

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
15 of 20
To determine the fundamental frequency of the beam, an analysis of the spectrum was
also carried out for each monitoring. After all the frequencies were extracted considering
every monitoring process, they were plotted to validate if the method can report the
behavior of the beam as well as present gradual changes in the system. Hence, if the
fundamental frequencies vary over time, it is an indicator that the beam is presenting
changes in its composition, which could be translated as structural deterioration.
Tables 3 and 4 summarize the results of the fundamental frequency determination by
sensors with respect to impacts on Points A and B, respectively. Based on the statistical
results, differences between synchronized and unsynchronized devices can be observed
after performing 30 epochs for each group. In addition, a more stable behavior in the
RTC-PPS synchronized groups can be noted compared to non-synchronized monitoring
tests. Sometimes it is possible to determine the fundamental frequency, as in the case of
Sensor 2, but other times not, as in the case of Sensor 1, where it can be seen how it is a set
that is too dispersed and far from the average, without mentioning that this set is the only
one that could not find the fundamental frequency that is close to 15.5 Hz. In summary,
it can be established that RTC-PPS tests present lower standard deviations and overall
better statistical performance, demonstrating that synchronized devices are more accurate
to determine fundamental frequency.
Table 3. Statistical calculations of the fundamental frequencies of the I-beam with the impact on A.
Method
Mean
SD
CV
Sensor 1 RTC+PPS
15.707 Hz
0.53
3.372%
Sensor 2 RTC+PPS
15.591 Hz
0.473
3.034%
Sensor 1 Unsync
9.397 Hz
3.138
33.394%
Sensor 2 Unsync
15.108 Hz
0.255
1.686%
Table 4. Statistical calculations of the fundamental frequencies of the I-beam with the impact on B.
Method
Mean
SD
CV
Sensor 1 RTC+PPS
15.42 Hz
0.656
4.251%
Sensor 2 RTC+PPS
15.445 Hz
0.523
3.387%
Sensor 1 Unsync
15.488 Hz
0.261
1.684%
Sensor 2 Unsync
16.178 Hz
2.281
14.097%
It is interesting to mention that the response of the system is different when the
monitoring is not synchronized because, as it can be seen in Figure 14, when the system
is not correctly synchronized, this imbalance causes one of its sensors to not report the
fundamental frequency correctly.
Figure 14 illustrates the comparison between data obtained by the RTC+PPS synchro-
nization method versus the non-synchronized method of fundamental frequency data from
measurements of the I-beam when the impact occurs at End A. These data are distributed
for each method into two sets of measurements, corresponding to sensors one and two,
respectively. These boxplots illustrate the dataset’s behavior, with the median represented
by a red line. The blue-shaded areas above and below the average line represent the
upper and lower quartiles, while the outer graduations represent the upper and lower
extremes. Lastly, points beyond the limits of the bars indicate outliers, resulting from
corruptions in the data presented on the monitoring due to various factors such as signal
transmission noise pollution or uncontrolled impacts on the I-beam. When the impact
is received at End A of the beam, it is observed that when the vibration data are taken
with the RTC+PPS synchronization method the group of frequencies is stable, while when
they are not synchronized, the vibration data present data sets that are distributed in a
non-uniform way.
In the case of monitoring the impacts at End B of the beam as shown in Figure 15, all
the data sets are stable.

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
16 of 20
Figure 14. Box plot analysis of fundamental frequency estimation by statistical group with impact at
end A of the I-beam where (a) is RTC+PPS sensor 1, (b) is RTC+PPS sensor 2, (c) is Unsynchronized
sensor 1 and (d) is Unsynchronized sensor 2.
Figure 15. Box plot analysis of fundamental frequency estimation by statistical group with impact at
end B of the I-beam where (a) is RTC+PPS sensor 1, (b) is RTC+PPS sensor 2, (c) is Unsynchronized
sensor 1 and (d) is Unsynchronized sensor 2.
6. Discussion
As it is observed in Figure 10, results demonstrate that this wireless monitoring system
can acquire vibration signals from two sensors in a proper way, as many authors have
previously reported. However, this study focuses on proposing a new synchronization
methodology to activate two or more wireless vibration sensors, and at the same time,
measure vibration propagation in structures. Because of this, it is very important to generate
a synchronized trigger signal to activate end nodes at the same time. In addition, it is
important to mention that common wireless sensor networks start measurement processes
by sending activation commands to end nodes one by one in a sequential way. This is
similar as the unsynchronized tests statistical groups reported in this project. On the one
hand, sequential activation commands make difficult to measure vibration propagation
in structures because of the time elapsed between end nodes activation commands as
illustrated in Figure 7. Furthermore, the proposed methodology relies on a trigger strategy
that consist of sending a common date–time start value in a sequential way to all end nodes
to establish a common RTC-based trigger. However, activation times between end nodes
provokes the loss of data associated to vibration propagation, because propagation time
could be close to sequential activation times. This is where this project proposes to utilize
the PPS signal from Ublox Neo 6M modules as acquisition trigger once the previously
preprogrammed common start datetime is reached by all end node RTC+PPS devices.
In addition, the propagation analysis experiment was carried out by acquiring 30 tests
for each statistical group and these groups were organized as Sensor 1 unsynchronized,

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
17 of 20
Sensor 2 unsynchronized, Sensor 1 RTC+PPS and Sensor 2 RTC+PPS. Consequently, syn-
chronization results demonstrate that the RTC+PPS synchronization method is reliable and
reduces the error by reducing the elapsed time between activation commands in RTC+PPS
based devices as it can be seen in Figure 7, ensuring that a given time between Sensor 1
and 2 vibration signals should be due to propagation time as it occurs in Figure 12 signals
instead of measurement errors due to activation delay between end nodes. Thus, the exact
time in which a vibration signal travels from Point A to Point B in a mechanical structure
can be detected. However, due to the utilized sampling frequency (100 Hz), propagation
time can be measured with 10 ms time resolution.
To validate the effectiveness of this methodology, fundamental frequency estimation
of a beam structure was chosen as parameter of study by comparing fundamental fre-
quency determination on the four statistical groups. Statistical analyzes were carried out by
calculating mean, standard deviation (SD) and variation coefficient (CV) from the funda-
mental frequency determination result from each vibration measurement and arranging the
data according to the previously mentioned statistical groups to compare their statistical
properties. In Figure 13, it can be observed an example of a vibration spectrum with its
fundamental frequency determination on the A side of the beam.
As summarized in Table 3, results indicate that the mean of fundamental frequency
estimation of Unsynchronized sensor 1 is far from the other groups value while SD and CV
parameters result higher for this group indicating that fundamental frequency estimation
is not reliable for Sensor 1 at Point A of the beam when unsynchronized trigger is utilized.
Counter-wise, Table 3 shows that RTC+PPS synchronized devices and Unsynchronized
sensor 1 have a fundamental frequency of around 15.5 Hz, which is similar between them,
and small SD and CV values, which indicates a reliable fundamental frequency estimation
on the A side of the beam.
Additionally, the results summarized in Table 4 present a similar behavior between
statistical groups, as observed in Table 3. However, in this case, results of the B point show
that Unsynchronized sensor 2 tests obtain a fundamental frequency mean of 16.178 Hz
which is slightly different from the rest of the statistical groups that obtain a value of
around 15.4 Hz. In addition, SD and CV parameters are higher on Unsynchronized sensor
2 test group when it is compared from the other statistical groups. Because of this, it can
be observed that RTC+PPS-based tests provide a more reliable fundamental frequency
estimation than unsynchronized devices due to precise synchronized trigger signal. It is
important to mention that the most unreliable statistical groups were the ones that utilized
unsynchronized trigger and the sensors located directly below the impact point of each
scenario. It should be noted that this phenomenon does not occur in cases where the
accelerometer is not directly below the point of impact. In these cases, the coefficient of
variation is very close to 1.68%. On the contrary, when the RTC+PPS synchronization
method is applied, this phenomenon does not occur.
Finally, box plot analyses were carried out on Figures 14 and 15, where it is seen
that orange line represents the median of each statistical group. On one side, it can be
observed that Figure 14 (c) box has a wider length due to a high variation between estimated
fundamental frequency values and a median value that is located far from the (a), (b) and
(d) groups which come out to be like Table 3 results. On the other side, Figure 15 shows
the results where box plots are similar between groups where median values are around
15.5 Hz. This can be understood as better performance on End B tests. However, some
atypical values can be observed in Figure 15 as small circles outside of the whiskers of
each box.
7. Conclusions
In this research, the development of a whole wireless accelerometer sensors network
system was proposed for vibration propagation measurement. As it was previously men-
tioned, conventional wireless sensor networks utilize sequential measurement activation
when multiple sensor reading is required. Consequently, a delay time appears between end

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
18 of 20
node to end node measurement activation signals. In addition, vibration propagation is the
phenomenon where mechanical vibrations travel across a solid structure and propagation
time is the time that takes for a stimulus to travel from a starting point to other point in
a structure. However, propagation time is often small in rigid structures and could be
difficult to be measured when sequential activation is utilized to measure multiple end
nodes in a sensor network. This is where synchronization is required to activate multiple
sensors reading at the same time, and RTC+PPS synchronized methodology was compared
to a conventional sequential reading in this project. The overall statistical results showed
that RTC+PPS synchronized end nodes provided a better and more reliable performance
compared to its unsynchronized counterparts that just relied on RTC as synchronization
signal source.
In this research, the results show that the developed RTC+PPS-based synchronization
system is reliable for the detection of vibration propagations in a structure. Because of this,
it is possible to obtain a precise synchronization between monitoring nodes and the master
node. An experimental validation of the system was carried out. In addition, the wireless
communication between the nodes was evaluated using RFM69 radios. A distance test
was carried out where the nodes managed to maintain the connection at more than 200 m,
demonstrating its viability for bridge monitoring applications. To ensure the integrity of
the data, the transfer confirmation function that validates the successful reception of the
data transmitted between nodes was implemented. This helped to minimize data loss and
ensured the reliability of the measurements.
Full-scale experimentation on an industrial steel beam was carried out and provided
valuable information on the vibration behavior of the structure. The obtained data made it
possible to identify the fundamental frequency of the beam and to analyze the propagation
of vibrations along its length. The precise synchronization and transfer confirmation
feature ensured that the data were reliable and consistent, which is essential for accurate
interpretation of results and decision making for SHM.
Furthermore, it can be established that the proposed methodology was effective to
determine the fundamental frequency with a value around 15.5 Hz in most of the cases
according to the Tables 3 and 4, Figures 14 and 15 results. However, an advantage on the
RTC+PPS synchronized devices can be observed due to its precise trigger methodology
that allows reduction in SD and CV in the tests, making this methodology more reliable for
vibration monitoring when multiple sensors reading is required.
In conclusion, this wireless monitoring system can be utilized for the acquisition of
useful synchronized vibration data on multiple points of bridges and other structures
with the advantage of a wireless synchronization trigger that does not require wiring the
structure for synchronization nor for data transmission. In addition, it is important to
mention that this methodology relies on GPS atomic clock to provide an almost perfect
synchronized PPS signal to be utilized as measurement trigger source. Finally, it can be
concluded that the combination of precise synchronized timing, reliable and long-range
communication makes it a valuable tool for early detection of structural problems and
improved management and maintenance of critical infrastructure.
Author Contributions: J.R.S.-L.: developed the methodology presented in this research, wrote most of
the paper, designed and implemented the presented hardware and software used for data collection,
and also performed the experiments; J.R.M.-A.: contributed with the idea presented and wrote part of
this paper; J.R.G.-C.: contributed statistical analysis and part of the writing; G.E.V.-B.: contributed by
providing his knowledge in the area of Geodesy and actively participated in the review of the state of
the art; J.M.L.-G.: contributed his knowledge in the area of civil engineering and provided access
to the case study structure of this investigation. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by CONAHCYT (Consejo Nacional de Humanidades, Ciencia
y Tecnologia), under scholarship 812898 and by Autonomous University of Sinaloa with the grant
PROFAPI 2022 A8-010.

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
19 of 20
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
Acknowledgments: Thanks to the Department of Civil Engineering of the Autonomous University
of Sinaloa for providing access to the area where the impact tests were carried out.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Amezquita-Sanchez, J.P.; Adeli, H. Signal Processing Techniques for Vibration-Based Health Monitoring of Smart Structures.
Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 2016, 23, 1–15. [CrossRef]
2.
Deng, H.; Chen, J. A Survey of Structural Health Monitoring Advances Based on Internet of Things (IoT) Sensors. Int. J. Adv.
Comput. Sci. Appl. 2023, 14, 225–234. [CrossRef]
3.
Alokita, S.; Rahul, V.; Jayakrishna, K.; Kar, V.R.; Rajesh, M.; Thirumalini, S.; Manikandan, M. Recent Advances and Trends in
Structural Health Monitoring. In Structural Health Monitoring of Biocomposites, Fibre-Reinforced Composites and Hybrid Composites;
Woodhead Publishing: Cambridge, UK, 2018; pp. 53–73. [CrossRef]
4.
Hu, W.; Zhang, C.; Deng, Z. Vibration and Elastic Wave Propagation in Spatial Flexible Damping Panel Attached to Four Special
Springs. Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simul. 2020, 84, 105199. [CrossRef]
5.
Hassani, S.; Dackermann, U. A Systematic Review of Advanced Sensor Technologies for Non-Destructive Testing and Structural
Health Monitoring. Sensors 2023, 23, 2204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Guzman-Acevedo, G.M.; Vazquez-Becerra, G.E.; Millan-Almaraz, J.R.; Rodriguez-Lozoya, H.E.; Reyes-Salazar, A.; Gaxiola-
Camacho, J.R.; Martinez-Felix, C.A. GPS, Accelerometer, and Smartphone Fused Smart Sensor for SHM on Real-Scale Bridges.
Adv. Civ. Eng. 2019, 2019, 6429430. [CrossRef]
7.
Vazquez-Becerra, G.E.; Gaxiola-Camacho, J.R.; Bennett, R.; Guzman-Acevedo, G.M.; Gaxiola-Camacho, I.E. Structural Evaluation
of Dynamic and Semi-Static Displacements of the Juarez Bridge Using GPS Technology. Measurement 2017, 110, 146–153.
[CrossRef]
8.
Muñoz, M.; Guevara, R.; González, S.; Jiménez, J.C. Reliable Data Acquisition System for a Low-Cost Accelerograph Applied to
Structural Health Monitoring. J. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol. Educ. 2021, 3, 181–194. [CrossRef]
9.
Chen, B.; Wang, X.; Sun, D.; Xie, X. Integrated System of Structural Health Monitoring and Intelligent Management for a
Cable-Stayed Bridge. Sci. World J. 2014, 2014, 689471. [CrossRef]
10.
Hamza, V.; Stopar, B.; Ambrožiˇc, T.; Turk, G.; Sterle, O. Testing Multi-Frequency Low-Cost GNSS Receivers for Geodetic
Monitoring Purposes. Sensors 2020, 20, 4375. [CrossRef]
11.
Elnabwy, M.; Kaloop, M.; Elbeltagi, E. Talkha Steel Highway Bridge Monitoring and Movement Identification Using RTK-GPS
Technique. Measurement 2013, 46, 4282–4292. [CrossRef]
12.
Naraharisetty, V.; Talari, V.S.; Neridu, S.; Kalapatapu, P.; Pasupuleti, V.D.K. Cloud Architecture for IOT Based Bridge Monitoring
Applications. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Emerging Techniques in Computational Intelligence
(ICETCI), Hyderabad, India, 25–27 August 2021; pp. 39–42.
13.
Mahmud, M.A.; Bates, K.; Wood, T.; Abdelgawad, A.; Yelamarthi, K. A Complete Internet of Things (IoT) Platform for Structural
Health Monitoring (SHM). In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 4th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), Singapore, 5–8
February 2018; pp. 275–279.
14.
Perera, R.; Pérez, A.; García-Diéguez, M.; Zapico-Valle, J. Active Wireless System for Structural Health Monitoring Applications.
Sensors 2017, 17, 2880. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Ragnoli, M.; Leoni, A.; Barile, G.; Stornelli, V.; Ferri, G. LoRa Structural Monitoring Wireless Sensor Networks. In Proceedings of
the SENSORNETS, Online, 23–24 February 2023; pp. 79–86.
16.
Adi, P.D.P.; Kitagawa, A. Performance Evaluation of E32 Long Range Radio Frequency 915 MHz Based on Internet of Things and
Micro Sensors Data. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 2019, 10, 38–49. [CrossRef]
17.
Adi, P.; Prasetya, D.; Setiawan, A.; Nachrowie, N.; Arifuddin, R. Design of Tsunami Detector Based Sort Message Service Using
Arduino and SIM900A to GSM/GPRS Module. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference On Advance and Scientific
Innovation, ICASI 2019, Banda Aceh, Indonesia, 18 July 2019. [CrossRef]
18.
Alva, R.E.; Pujades, L.G.; González-Drigo, R.; Luzi, G.; Caselles, O.; Pinzón, L.A. Dynamic Monitoring of a Mid-Rise Building by
Real-Aperture Radar Interferometer: Advantages and Limitations. Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1025. [CrossRef]
19.
Di Sarno, L.; Betti, M.; Karatzetzou, A.; Ubertini, F.; Baraccani, S.; Azzara, R.M.; Palermo, M.; Gasparini, G.; Trombetti, T.
Long-Term Seismometric Monitoring of the Two Towers of Bologna (Italy): Modal Frequencies Identification and Effects Due to
Traffic Induced Vibrations. Front. Built Environ. 2020, 1, 85. Available online: www.frontiersin.org (accessed on 26 August 2023).
20.
Rasras, M.; Elfadel, I.M.; Duong Ngo, H. Editorial for the special issue on MEMS accelerometers. Micromachines 2019, 10, 290.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Bedon, C.; Bergamo, E.; Izzi, M.; Noè, S. Prototyping and Validation of MEMS Accelerometers for Structural Health Monitoring—
The Case Study of the Pietratagliata Cable-Stayed Bridge. J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2018, 7, 30. [CrossRef]

Sensors 2024, 24, 199
20 of 20
22.
Villacorta, J.J.; Del-Val, L.; Martínez, R.D.; Balmori, J.-A.; Magdaleno, Á.; López, G.; Izquierdo, A.; Lorenzana, A.; Basterra, L.-A.
Design and Validation of a Scalable, Reconfigurable and Low-Cost Structural Health Monitoring System. Sensors 2021, 21, 648.
[CrossRef]
23.
Preethichandra, D.M.G.; Suntharavadivel, T.G.; Kalutara, P.; Piyathilaka, L.; Izhar, U. Influence of Smart Sensors on Structural
Health Monitoring Systems and Future Asset Management Practices. Sensors 2023, 23, 8279. [CrossRef]
24.
Parisi, E.; Moallemi, A.; Barchi, F.; Bartolini, A.; Brunelli, D.; Buratti, N.; Acquaviva, A. Time and Frequency Domain Assessment
of Low-Power MEMS Accelerometers for Structural Health Monitoring. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Workshop
on Metrology for Industry 4.0 & IoT (MetroInd4.0&IoT), Trento, Italy, 7–9 June 2022; pp. 234–239.
25.
Gong, X.; Kuo, Y.-C.; Zhou, G.; Wu, W.-J.; Liao, W.-H. An Aerosol Deposition Based MEMS Piezoelectric Accelerometer for Low
Noise Measurement. Microsyst. Nanoeng. 2023, 9, 23. [CrossRef]
26.
Olaszek, P.; Wyczałek, I.; Sala, D.; Kokot, M.; Andrzej’swiercz, A.A. Monitoring of the Static and Dynamic Displacements of
Railway Bridges with the Use of Inertial Sensors. Sensors 2020, 20, 2767. [CrossRef]
27.
Salazar, J.R. Sistema Inteligente de Monitoreo de Estructuras Civiles En Alta Resolucion. Master’s Thesis, Universidad Autonoma
de Sinaloa, Culiacan, Mexico, 2020.
28.
Model 352C03|PCB Piezotronics. Available online: https://www.pcb.com/products?m=352c03 (accessed on 17 August 2023).
29.
Dipietrangelo, F.; Nicassio, F.; Scarselli, G. Structural Health Monitoring for Impact Localisation via Machine Learning. Mech.
Syst. Signal Process. 2023, 183, 109621. [CrossRef]
30.
Chamran, S.; Kurhan, D.; Fischer, S. Modeling of the Dynamic Rail Deflection Using Elastic Wave Propagation. J. Appl. Comput.
Mech. 2022, 8, 379–387. [CrossRef]
31.
Sun, X.; Su, Y.; Huang, Y.; Tan, J.; Yi, J.; Hu, T.; Zhu, L. Edge Computing-Based ERBS Time Synchronization Algorithm in WSNs.
Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput. 2020, 2020, 8840367. [CrossRef]
32.
Phan, L.-A.; Kim, T.; Kim, T.; Lee, J.; Ham, J.-H. Performance Analysis of Time Synchronization Protocols in Wireless Sensor
Networks. Sensors 2019, 19, 3020. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Shi, F.; Tuo, X.; Yang, S.X.; Lu, J.; Li, H. Rapid-Flooding Time Synchronization for Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE
Trans Ind. Inf. 2020, 16, 1581–1590. [CrossRef]
34.
Pardo-Zamora, O.N.; Romero-Troncoso, R.d.J.; Millan-Almaraz, J.R.; Morinigo-Sotelo, D.; Osornio-Rios, R.A. Methodology for
Power Quality Measurement Synchronization Based on GPS Pulse-Per-Second Algorithm. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2021, 70,
1–9. [CrossRef]
35.
Pardo-Zamora, O.N.; Romero-Troncoso, R.d.J.; Millan-Almaraz, J.R.; Morinigo-Sotelo, D.; Osornio-Rios, R.A.; Antonino-Daviu,
J.A. Power Quality Disturbance Tracking Based on a Proprietary FPGA Sensor with GPS Synchronization. Sensors 2021, 21, 3910.
[CrossRef]
36.
Yıldırım, K.S.; Gürcan, Ö. Efficient Time Synchronization in a Wireless Sensor Network by Adaptive Value Tracking. IEEE Trans.
Wirel. Commun. 2014, 13, 3650–3664. [CrossRef]
37.
Sommer, P.; Wattenhofer, R. Gradient Clock Synchronization in Wireless Sensor Networks. In Proceedings of the 2009 International
Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks, San Francisco, CA, USA, 13–16 April 2009; pp. 37–48.
38.
Koo, K.Y.; Hester, D.; Kim, S. Time Synchronization for Wireless Sensors Using Low-Cost Gps Module and Arduino. Front. Built
Environ. 2019, 4, 420014. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
