Title: GPS-synchronization of a seismic accelerometer and a ground-based inter-
ferometric radar for Structural Health Monitoring
Authors:
Andrea Cioncolini
Lapo Miccinesi
Alessandra Beni
Lorenzo Pagnini
Jingfeng Shan
Massimiliano Pieraccini

GPS-synchronization of a seismic accelerometer and a ground-based interferomet-
ric radar for Structural Health Monitoring
Andrea Cioncolini, Lapo Miccinesi, Alessandra Beni, Lorenzo Pagnini, Jingfeng Shan
and Massimiliano Pieraccini
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a seismic accelerometer with GPS-synchronization based on the
pulse per second (PPS) signal provided by the GNSS satellite network. This feature is
essential for a Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) network that includes different sen-
sors as for example accelerometers, cameras and a ground-based radar. The PPS signal
is widely used in applications of timing synchronization because of its high accuracy and
long-term stability. The common time-base between devices allows the internal time of
the devices to be resynchronized every second, avoiding drift. In this work, we developed
and tested acquisition board for seismic accelerometer with custom firmware designed
to provide synchronized data recorded by different acquisition systems. The universal
time (UTC) synchronized with PPS has been assigned to the data of each devices. The
developed board has been tested with simultaneous acquisition a seismic accelerometer
in MEMS (Micro Electro-Mechanical System) technology and a ground-based interfer-
ometric radar,both GPS synchronized. The two sensors are equipped with high precision
GNSS receiver u-blox F9, that provide the UTC data and the PPS signal. To validate the
synchronization system, the accelerometer and the ground-based radar were operated
simultaneously to detect the oscillations of a moving target (a metallic swinging rod).
The results of the experiment demonstrate that the sensors are well synchronized and
the evaluations of the displacement are very similar, with good accuracy for perform-
ing dynamic structure monitoring. It is worth noting that this comparative analysis has
highlighted the role of the automatic synchronization.
INTRODUCTION
In the field of Structural Health Monitoring (SHM), many heterogeneous sensing
systems are used, such as accelerometers [1], interferometric radars [2], and imaging
devices [3]. Combining multiple sensors enables more accurate and reliable structural
monitoring.This approach offers a clearer state of the building’s or bridge’s condition.
Accurate time synchronization ensures effective data fusion and reliable correlation with
external events [4] [5].The time alignment among various sources is particularly crucial
in dynamic scenarios, such as monitoring the effects of traffic loads on bridges or cap-
turing transient oscillations caused by seismic activity. Indeed, a common challenge in
multi-sensor SHM networks is clock drift among devices, which can introduce signif-
icant temporal mismatches and compromise the integrity of data analysis. To address
this, the authors in [6] propose to integrate a high-resolution digital accelerometer with
an intelligent wireless sensor (WSS) platform, called Xnode, to improve data synchro-
nization in wireless sensor networks (WSSNs). Recently, the use of the Pulse Per Sec-
Andrea Cioncolini, PhD Student, Email: andrea.cioncolini@unifi.it. ESECH Lab, Department of
Information Engineering, University of Florence, Via di Santa Marta, 3, 50139 - Florence

ond (PPS) signal provided by Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) has become
a widely adopted solution for achieving precise timing synchronization [7] [8]. The
PPS signal offers high timing accuracy (often within tens of nanoseconds) and long-
term stability, which makes it ideal for aligning sensor measurements to a universal time
reference, such as Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) [9]. In this context, the present
work presents a developed accelerometer system equipped with GNSS-based synchro-
nization via the PPS signal. The system is designed to provide timestamped data with
high temporal precision, allowing integration with other PPS synchronized sensors, such
as an interferometric radar. A dedicated hardware and firmware architecture was de-
veloped around a Nucleo STM32 microcontroller, which interfaces with a sigma delta
(Σ∆) Analog to Digital Converter (ADC) for simultaneous triaxial data acquisition. To
validate the performance of the proposed synchronization method, a controlled experi-
ment was conducted using the MEMS-based accelerometer and an X-Band radar system
to detect oscillations of a moving bar. Both systems employ high-precision u-blox F9
GNSS receivers, ensuring reliable PPS and UTC data. The results confirm the efficacy of
the developed solution in maintaining precise temporal alignment across heterogeneous
measurement platforms, laying the foundation for synchronized SHM networks.
ACCELEROMETER SYSTEM DESIGN
The developed system can be seen in Figure 1, which comprehend: the Solgeo AMS
PLUS accelerometer, the AccelBoard which is the acquisition board designed to acquire
data from the accelerometer and GPS, a Nucleo Board STM32 microcontroller which
hosts the firmware, the GPS Receiver Ublox Module and its Antenna which provides the
UTC and the PPS from the GPS, and a computer with the developed MATLAB GUI.
Figure 1. Developed Accelerometer System.
GPS-PPS Synchronization Method
The GPS-PPS synchronization principle is illustrated in Figure 2: the GPS receiver
provides, every second, a signal called PPS. PPS is an absolute time source that is highly
stable and precise as it is generated by the atomic clocks inside the GPS satellites. Most

manufacturers (Trimble, UBlox, Leica, etc.) offer GPS receivers with a PPS precision
ranging from 10 to 100 nanoseconds. The logic unit acquires the UTC time form the
GPS receiver and coverts it in epoch time (the number of seconds elapsed from January
1, 1970 at 00:00:00 UTC to the specified date and time). The UTC epoch has been
updated and synchronized each PPS. The PPS signal is used to reset the internal timer
which measure the time digits, e.g. µs. The time stamp t is given by:
t = UTCbase + NPPS + δt.
(1)
Where UTCbase is the epoch of first PPS, NPPS is the number of seconds (number of
PPS events) after the first PPS, and δt is the fine accuracy of time expressed in µs. In
general, the accuracy of this method is affected by the interrupt latency in capturing
the PPS signal, which depends on the type of processor used. Furthermore, the time
resolution is determined by the internal timer’s precision, which is reset at each PPS
signal to prevent the timer from drifting.
Figure 2. Typical PPS synchronization principle.
Implementation on the micro-controller STM32 NUCLEO Board
The microcontroller (µC) used is a STM32H563, which offers multiple interrupt
sources managed by the NVIC (Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller), ensuring low in-
terrupt latency and enables the efficient processing of late-arriving interrupts. Upon
power up, the µC configures the ADC and then enables monitoring of the PPS using an
EXTI (External Interrupt/Event Controller). This setup allows the µC to capture each
PPS from the Ublox Module. Subsequently, the µC acquires the UTC for the first time
by decoding the UBX-NAV-TIMEUTC message from the U-Blox F9 module and then
enables the internal timer with resolution of 1µs. This approach prevents the loss of first
PPS events after acquiring the UTC. Each PPS event triggers an ISR (interrupt Service
Routine), which updates the epoch time and resets the internal timer. In addition to han-
dling the PPS interrupt, the µC also must manages the ADC signals through interrupt
to associate an accurate timestamps with the incoming data. As well as providing the
channels data and the clock, the ADC also generates a data-ready signal to indicate the
imminent availability of new data. On the µC, the interface with the ADC is handled
via the SAI (Serial Audio Interface), which is suitable for low-frequency (up to tens

of kHz) and high-resolution signals. The SAI interface is configured in DMA (Direct
Memory Access) triggered by the data-ready signal. Using DMA, the µC can mange
other interrupts also during the ADC data acquisition. In this way, the latency of times-
tamp is reduced. The timestamp is associated to the data-ready signal, which manages
an interrupt on the internal timer. The complete algorithm is illustrated in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Flow Chart.
Equipment
The accelerometer used was an AMS-PLUS by Solgeo. It is a triaxial accelerometer
with 0.7µg/
√
Hz of noise density, and a dynamic range larger than 110 dB. This ac-
celerometer is particular suitable to be used with an interferometric-radar, since it offers
an accuracy on displacement (by integrating twice the acceleration) similar or batter to
the radar. Three channels of the accelerometer has been acquired by the AccelBoard
(Figure 1). This board was designed, based on a high resolution Σ∆ADC. As before
explained, the AccelBoard has been connected to the µC which associate the PPS-based
timestamp to each ADC data. In particular we used a STM32H563 µC by STMicroelec-
tronics, and a GPS receiver ZED-F9P-02B by Ublox.
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
To validate the developed system a comparison with other PPS-timestamped instru-
ments were made. In particular, we used an X-Band Radar, which was developed to
provide a PPS synchronized timestamps. The radar acquires data at a Pulse Repetition
Frequency (PRF) of 13.514 kHz, while the accelerometer operates at 1 kHz. Figure 4
shows a schematic representation of the experimental setup of the controlled scenario,
which was arranged in a garden at the University of Florence. A corner reflector (CR)
was placed on a metallic bar, which was bound to the lower end. The CR was located at

15.5 m away from the position of the radar. On the same metallic bar was installed also
the accelerometer, positioned 40 cm lower than the CR position. After the measurement
starts, the metal bar, previously held under tension, is released and begins to oscillate.
Figure 4. Measurement setup.
The synchronization between the two sensors have been verified by comparing the
difference between consecutive time stamp. The results is shown in Figure 5. In Figure
5 the average Pulse Repetition Time (PRT) has been subtracted to spotlight the synchro-
nization event. The peaks in Figure 5 corresponds to the PPS event. Indeed the δt of
Equation 1 accumulates latency due to accuracy of internal clock. This cumulative la-
tency is represented by those peaks, since the δt has been reset each PPS. Moreover,
there might be an additional delay due to reset operation, which is at maximum of a few
of µseconds. In Figure 5, it can be observed that both systems are resynchronized simul-
taneously upon receiving the PPS signal. In fact the peaks related to PPS occurring at
the same time. The difference in time is related to the different internal clock accuracy
and resynchronization procedure. The accelerometer takes about 20 µs more than the
radar each PPS.
Once the synchronization of the two systems has been analyzed, we proceed with
the estimation of the displacement. Since the radar measures the displacement of CR,
the signal of accelerometer has been retrieved by double time-integration. After each
integration, the resulting signal was digital filtered with a Butterworth band-pass filter
between 1 Hz and 500 Hz. To compare the displacements measured by both sensors,
the displacement retrieved by the accelerometer was linear interpolated on the radar’s
acquisitions time-vector which acquires at about 13 kHz while the accelerometer sys-
tem at 1 kHz. As illustrated in Figure 6 it is possible to observe the typical damped
oscillating trend. From the zoomed figure on the right side, we can see also how the
two trends are in phase, without any shift. After interpolation on a unique time vector,
the root mean square deviation between the two sensors was calculated, resulting in 3.1
mm. To obtain this grade of estimation of the displacements, two compensations were
made. The first compensation concerns the accelerometer coordinate system. During the
oscillation of the pole, there is an effect of rotation on the accelerometer measurement.

Figure 5. Synchronization Comparison.
Figure 6. Displacement Comparison: on the left the displacement in whole measurement,
on the right a zoom corresponding to the black rectangle.
While the radar measures the displacement along the horizontal plane, the accelerometer
measures along its coordinate system. We have to rotate this system onto the horizontal
plane. It is possible to estimate this rotation by using the projection of gravity on the ac-
celerometer system. The other compensation regards the difference in altitude between
the accelerometer and the CR.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this work, a direct comparison is carried out between the accelerometer and the
radar for structural dynamic monitoring. The sensors were simultaneously tested to com-
pare the performance of the systems, in terms of accuracy of displacement estimation and
synchronization, for the dynamic monitoring of civil structures such as buildings and
bridges. The measurement presented in a controlled scenario, using an oscillating bar,

demonstrates the alignment of the displacements measured by two independent sensors,
synchronized with the described GPS-PPS synchronization method. The synchroniza-
tion with the PPS was confirmed, verifying the synchronization events at the same time.
The results of the displacements demonstrate the great potential of the synchronization
of multiple sensors for structural dynamic monitoring. This study could be the starting
point for more advanced analyses and techniques.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research activity has been partially funded by Huawei Technologies, Sweden
AB in the framework of a scientific cooperation with the Department of Information
Engineering of the University of Florence.
REFERENCES
1. Zhu, L., Y. Fu, R. Chow, B. F. Spencer, J. W. Park, and K. Mechitov. “Development of a
High-Sensitivity Wireless Accelerometer for Structural Health Monitoring,” 18(1):262, ISSN
1424-8220, doi:10.3390/s18010262, number: 1 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publish-
ing Institute.
2. Beni, A., L. Miccinesi, L. Pagnini, A. Cioncolini, J. Shan, and M. Pieraccini. “Interferomet-
ric Radars for Bridge Monitoring: Comparison among X-Bands, Ku-Bands, and W-Bands,”
16(17):3323, ISSN 2072-4292, doi:10.3390/rs16173323, number: 17 Publisher: Multidisci-
plinary Digital Publishing Institute.
3. Feng, D. and M. Q. Feng. “Computer vision for SHM of civil infrastructure: From dynamic
response measurement to damage detection – A review,” 156:105–117, ISSN 0141-0296, doi:
10.1016/j.engstruct.2017.11.018.
4. Falletti, E., D. Margaria, G. Marucco, B. Motella, M. Nicola, and M. Pini. “Synchronization
of Critical Infrastructures Dependent Upon GNSS: Current Vulnerabilities and Protection
Provided by New Signals,” 13(3):2118–2129, ISSN 1937-9234, doi:10.1109/JSYST.2018.
2883752.
5. Margaria, D. and A. Vesco. “Trusted GNSS-Based Time Synchronization for Industry 4.0 Ap-
plications,” 11(18):8288, ISSN 2076-3417, doi:10.3390/app11188288, number: 18 Publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
6. Veluthedath Shajihan, S. A., R. Chow, K. Mechitov, Y. Fu, T. Hoang, and B. F. Spencer. “De-
velopment of Synchronized High-Sensitivity Wireless Accelerometer for Structural Health
Monitoring,” 20(15):4169, ISSN 1424-8220, doi:10.3390/s20154169, number: 15 Publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
7. Le Cam, V., A. Bouche, and D. Pallier. “Wireless sensors synchronization: An accurate and
deterministic GPS-based algorithm,” vol. 1, pp. 1346–1354, doi:10.12783/shm2017/14006.
8. Giammarini, M., M. Pieralisi, D. Isidori, E. Concettoni, C. Cristalli, and M. Fioravanti. “Real-
time synchronization of wireless sensor network by 1-PPS signal,” in Smart Sensors, Ac-
tuators, and MEMS VII; and Cyber Physical Systems, SPIE, vol. 9517, pp. 300–309, doi:
10.1117/12.2179479.
9. Salazar-Lopez, J. R., J. R. Millan-Almaraz, J. R. Gaxiola-Camacho, G. E. Vazquez-Becerra,
and J. M. Leal-Graciano. “GPS-Based Network Synchronization of Wireless Sensors for Ex-
tracting Propagation of Disturbance on Structural Systems,” 24(1):199, ISSN 1424-8220, doi:
10.3390/s24010199, number: 1 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
