High-Sensitivity Vibration Monitoring of La Marota 
Viaduct Using a Novel 128-Channel Laser Radar 
System 
Stephen Adrian O’Brien1, Nicola Tarque2, Jose Luis Rubio1, Gregory Pandraud1, 
Eduardo Margallo1, José Luis Martínez3 and José Maria Goicolea2 
1 Ommatidia LiDAR, Madrid, Spain 
2 Department of Continuum Mechanics and Structures, E.T.S.I Caminos, Canales y Puertos, 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain 
3INES Ingenieros Consultores, Madrid, Spain 
stephen.obrien@ommatidia-lidar.com 
Abstract: In this study, we employed a novel system combining massively 
parallel FMCW Laser Radar and Laser Doppler Vibrometry to monitor and 
analyze the structural vibrations of La Marota Viaduct, as part of a multi-year 
structural health monitoring project for high-speed railway infrastructure 
near Almodóvar del Río in southern Spain. The system features 128 parallel 
channels capable of non-contact velocity and displacement measurements 
with 40kHz sampling rate, allowing the real-time capture of dynamic 
structural behavior across a wide range of frequencies from a single 
installation point. The optical measurements were in good agreement with 
the numerical models and the accelerometer and strain gauge results. The 
exceptional sensitivity of the interferometry-based technique, particularly in 
low-frequency domains below 2 Hz, combined with the large number of 
measurement points offers the potential for superior model performance 
compared to traditional accelerometer setups. The high resolution and rapid 
acquisition capabilities of the system facilitated detailed analysis of the 
bridge's vibrational modes, providing insights into structural health and 
potential areas of concern. 
Keywords: Laser RADAR, vibrometry,  SHM, bridge monitoring. 
1 
Q1 Laser Radar 
1.1 
Ommatidia Laser Radar ’s solution 
The system, with 128 simultaneous measurement channels, employs Frequency 
Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) Laser Radar [1] and Laser Doppler 
Vibrometry (LDV) [2] techniques for ranging and velocity measurement, 
respectively.  
In the FMCW approach, a continuous-wave laser undergoes frequency 
modulation, and the ranging information is extracted through coherent detection by 
analyzing the beating signal generated from the interference between the local 
oscillator and the return signal. The use of interference based coherent detection 
makes the system also sensitive to the Doppler-shift effect of the reflected light, 

2 
enabling the use of the LDV approach to extract the velocity or vibration 
information via coherent detection of the  scattered light and the reference beam. 
This approach to optical offers a number of advantages: 
● 
Enhanced Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) through coherent detection. 
● 
Continuous-wave laser operation, eliminating the need for high peak 
power conditions. 
● 
Intrinsic Doppler velocity measurement, enabling simultaneous distance 
and velocity determination. 
● 
Full complex signal acquisition, which allows for advanced signal 
processing. 
A key enabling innovation in this system is the integration of Ommatidia 
LiDAR's Lightfield concept, leveraging the full complex return signal to implement 
a beam-forming network in the receiver. This enables lens-less lateral resolution, 
enhancing spatial imaging capabilities, and allowing the parallel detection of the 
aforementioned 128 simultaneous channels. More details on the Lightfield concept 
combined with FMCW can be found in [3]. The full description of the instrument 
placement and location is given in the following section. 
 
Fig. 1. Q1S system used in this work, as installed in the configuration of bridge monitoring. 
1.2 
System architecture 
The two main components of the system are a light field sensor that receives the 
light reflected from the scene, and a tunable light source (DFB laser), which acts as 
the emitter. Additionally, the light is collected and emitted through dedicated optics. 
On the Optical Scanning Plane (OSP), 128 optical channels are collected 
simultaneously using the beamforming network of the Photonic Integrated Circuit 
(PIC) Receiver, while illuminating the scene with a line of light matching the 
angular field of view of the receiver. The proposed imager processes the electrical 
outputs to resolve the relative phase and power of the incident wave at each pixel. 
The photons are then converted into electrical signals and read out. Algorithms 
allow the generation of point clouds. The FMCW concept is applied here, building 
on the advantages of this technique (heterodyne gain, coherence gating, coherent 
detection) while eliminating the need for scanning and the use of collimated beams. 

3 
 
Fig.2. Overall system architecture with a zoom in of the PIC receiver at the core of 
the Laser Radar. 
The PIC Receiver consists of an integrated Photonic Integrated Circuit, based on 
Silicon Nitride [4] technology. 128 optical channels collecting the return radiation 
are mixed in phase and in quadrature with the local oscillator coming from the 
illumination path. The beating signal is detected by external detectors, and the 
analog signal is read out by dedicated electronics. The latter is further interfaced 
with an FPGA, which processes the data stream to provide the 4D point clouds and 
Doppler-based instantaneous velocity measurements (Fig.2). 
2 
Implementation at the La Marota Viaduct 
Ommatidia LiDAR has successfully installed four units of its Q1 system on a high-
speed train bridge, with each unit covering a separate span of the structure as shown 
in Figure 4. The La Marota Viaduct carries the Córdoba-Málaga high-speed rail line 
across the shallow valley of the Arroyo de La Marota in Spain.  
 
Fig. 3. Position of the four Q1s Laser Radar and LDV systems installed under the La Marota 
Viaduct.   
The bridge is a continuous concrete box girder, 14 m wide, that accommodates two 
tracks. It has a total length of 380 m. With a depth-to-span ratio of 1:14, it is a typical 
stiff high-speed railway viaduct (Fig.3). The viaduct is supported by two abutments 
and eight intermediate rectangular piers measuring 5.5 x 2 meters, with heights 
varying from 10 to 15 meters. This configuration results in seven central spans of 

4 
45 meters each and two end spans of 33 meters. All supports, using pot-type 
constrained elastomeric bearings, accommodate longitudinal movement and 
bending about both vertical and transverse axes. One abutment is fixed 
longitudinally, while the other allows free movement. The viaduct’s cross-section 
is a single-cell box girder with cantilevered top slabs. Five distinct cross-sectional 
types are incorporated along the viaduct’s length, all maintaining a consistent deck 
width of 14 meters, sufficient to carry two standard-gauge railway tracks on ballast 
(Fig.4). 
   
Fig. 4. Views (outside and inside) and plan view of the La Marota viaduct (left). The 
nomenclature for the end abutments, internal piers and spans are shown in the plan view 
(right). 
Each span of the bridge is monitored by 128 speed signals (the optical channels 
described in section 1.2), uniformly spaced at 0.49° across a 62° Field of View 
(FoV). This specific FoV has been chosen to collect information over the full span. 
The LiDAR is also positioned at an angle providing a large density of points at key 
locations such as at the interface between the supporting pillar and the bridge deck. 
To enhance sensitivity, a retroreflective paint was applied, ensuring precise and 
accurate data collection. A careful alignment of the 128 laser beams onto the painted 
line is done for all units, ensuring optimal operating conditions (Fig.5).  
Each of the Q1 systems are powered through a single Power over Ethernet cable. 
Similarly data connection is done using this cable Fig.5. 

5 
 
 
Fig. 5 Top left: Laser Points distribution under the bridge offering a full coverage of the 
bridge Top right: A painted line improves the reflection of the light and the overall system 
performances. Bottom: Power and data collection for the Q1S units. 
3 
A 3D beam numerical model 
A finite element (FE) model of the La Marota Viaduct was previously [5] developed 
to analyse its dynamic behaviour. While a detailed 3D shell element model was 
initially considered for its accuracy in representing geometry, boundary conditions, 
and local deformations, its high computational cost led to adopting a simplified 3D 
beam element model for this study. 
This beam FE model was implemented in Abaqus, using 3D beam-column 
elements. The nine-span hyperstatic structure (seven 45m spans and two 33m spans) 
was modelled, with each span incorporating five distinct caisson cross-sections. 
These sections were defined as general sections, combining their respective 
geometries and calibrated mechanical properties. Non-structural mass was also 
included, accounting for dead loads such as ballast, rails, sleepers, and guard walls. 
Boundary conditions (BCs) were applied, reflecting design specifications and 
validated through field observations. At all supports (two abutments and eight 
piers), transverse (Z-axis) and vertical (Y-axis) displacements, as well as rotation 
about the longitudinal axis (X-axis), were constrained. At the fixed abutment (E-1, 
Figure 7a), longitudinal displacement and Y-rotation were also restricted, but at the 
initial centroid of the beam section to accurately replicate the connection detail. The 
partial longitudinal constraint at abutment E-1, provided by pot-type elastomeric 
bearings, was modelled using a spring element. Multi-point constraints (MPCs) 
were used to connect the BCs at the shifted longitudinal axis to the original centroid 

6 
axis. Similarly, the partial rotational constraint provided by the elastomeric pot 
bearings at the piers and right abutment was simulated using rotational spring 
elements (Fig. 6 b).  
  
  
a) 
  
 
 
 
 b) 
Fig. 6 a) Internal view of the fixed abutment E-1, b) View of an elastomeric pot. 
Fig. 7 a) shows the 3D beam finite element model of the La Marota viaduct 
constructed in Abaqus. Fig. 7 b) shows the viaduct's deformation under a simulated 
railway load and below the history deflection at the central point of the 7th span. The 
calibrated eigenvalues of the digital twin model were compared with the 
experimental ones obtained through an OMA, and the results are shown in Table 1 
for the first five frequencies.  
 
a) 
 
b) 
Fig. 7. a) 3D beam beam finite element model in Abaqus, b) example of the deformation 
under the pass of a train. 
Table 1. Calibrated eigenvalues vs experimental ones. 
(Hz) 
f1 
f2 
f3 
f4 
f5 
Experimental 
3.08 
3.87 
4.50 
5.74 
6.08 
FEM 
3.03 
3.67 
4.69 
5.72 
6.97 
Variation % 
1.42 
5.02 
-4.13 
0.40 
14.66 

7 
4 
Laser Doppler Vibrometry Measurements 
The flexural modes of interest range from 3.0 to 9 Hz. The trains operate at speeds 
of up to 300 km/h. A complementary monitoring system features accelerometers at 
the center of each span  (PBC 393A03) and strain gauges on the track rails, allowing 
for the measurement of train velocities and axle loads. Peak accelerations during 
train passages can reach up to 2 m/s². 
4.1 
Comparison with accelerometers 
The comparison is made at mid-span of the 7th span, with the accelerometer placed 
under the South track (Málaga -> Córdoba direction).  
The LDV data was obtained with the Q1S system installed at the 6th pillar and 
pointing towards the 7th span. The data was acquired while a train was passing over 
the track, under which both the accelerometer and the Q1S LDV measuring points 
are located. 
In Fig. 8 (left) we show a plot of the acceleration reading obtained directly from 
the A03 vs. the derived velocity measurement from the Q1S by the point located at 
the same position . On the right-top side we show a detail of the signal tails after 
the train has exited the span, and on the right-bottom side we show the frequency 
spectrum of the central part of the signal. 
 
Fig. 8. Left) Comparison of A03 acceleration and Q1S velocity derivative measurements. 
Right top) Detail on the signal tails Right bottom) Frequency spectrum of the central part of 
the signal 
4.2 
Numerical vs Experimental VVI comparison 
This section details the multichannel laser vibrometry measurements and their 
interpretation using the velocity vibration index (VVI). These experimental VVI 

8 
measurements are then compared with corresponding results from the numerical 
model (digital twin). The VVI, a measure of the spatial extent of vibration, is 
calculated using vibration velocity data acquired over the central 25 meters of spans 
4, 5, 6, and 7 of the La Marota Viaduct (see Fig. 3). 
Specifically, VVIs were calculated from measurements taken by 31 channels, 
ranging from channel 70 (at 10.01 m) to channel 100 (at 16.97 m), see Fig. 9. The 
following expression defines the VVI: 
𝑉𝑉𝐼= 1
𝑁
1
𝐿∑∑(𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑖
2)𝑗
𝑘
𝑖=1
𝑁
𝑗=1
 
with N the time records in the episode of duration T, 𝑙𝑖 the length of the tributary 
board of each point, 𝐿 the  total length of the area under analysis and 𝛼𝑖 the  angle 
of each ray with the vertical. 
 
Fig. 9. Central area of laser incidence on a span of the structure. 
One case study is analysed to validate the VVI under real train loads. The train 
travelled in the Córdoba-Madrid direction. Measurements recorded by lasers LA-
P5 and LA-P6 on spans 6 and 7, (respectively Fig. 10 and 11), were compared with 
results from the digital twin model (filtered up to 10 Hz). The first case involved a 
double-composition S112 train passing at 260 km/h. As shown in Table 2, the error 
between the numerical and experimental VVI values is less than 5%, which is 
considered acceptable given the high sensitivity of the VVI calculation. 
Table 2. Comparison of the experimental and numerical VVI for one case studies (Train 
S112 double at 260 km/h). 
 Span 
6 
7 
Experimental 
1.92E-06 
1.94E-06 
Numerical 
1.99E-06 
2.03E-06 
Difference 
3% 
5% 
 
A comparison of the velocity time-history plots of the experimental and numerical 
measures for the case study is shown in the figure below: 

9 
 
Fig. 10. Pillar 5 (6th Span) Train S112 double, vel. 260 km/h: a,c) Experimental, all channels 
(a) and channel 70 (c) velocity time-history; b,d) FEM, all channels (b) and channel 70 
(d) velocity time-history. 
 
Fig. 11. Pillar 6 (7th Span) Train S112 double, vel. 260 km/h: a,c) Experimental, all channels 
(a) and channel 70 (c) velocity time-history; b,d) FEM, all channels (b) and channel 70 (d) 
velocity time-history. 
4.3 
Numerical vs Experimental relative displacement comparison 
Finally we have also analysed the relative displacement values at mid-span obtained 
by integrating the LDV data, and compared it with the numerical results. Since the 
Q1S velocity information provides good information even at very low frequencies, 
the velocity information can be integrated with high accuracy. Fig. 12 shows an 
example of this comparison, showing the excellent agreement between both of 
them. 

10 
 
Fig. 12. Relative displacement at the middle of the 7th span obtained from the velocity 
information measured by the Q1S (left) and simulated with the digital twin model (right). 
5 
Conclusions 
In conclusion, the study demonstrates that the novel 128-channel Laser Radar 
system, leveraging both FMCW and LDV techniques, provides highly sensitive, 
real-time monitoring of structural vibrations in the La Marota Viaduct. The system’s 
ability to capture sub-millimeter displacements and accurately resolve low-
frequency vibrational modes significantly enhances the detection and analysis of 
dynamic structural behaviors, offering a promising alternative to traditional 
accelerometer-based methods. 
The strong agreement between optical measurements and both numerical 
predictions and accelerometer measurements validates the system’s effectiveness, 
underscoring its potential to advance structural health monitoring and predictive 
maintenance strategies for critical infrastructure. 
References 
1. Martin A et al., Photonic Integrated Circuit-Based FMCW Coherent LiDAR, in Journal 
of Lightwave Technology 36(19): 4640-4645. 
2. Rothberg SJ et al., An international review of laser Doppler vibrometry: Making light 
work of vibration measurement, in Optics and Lasers in Engineering 99, 11-22. 
3. Guivernau JL, Gonzalo IB, Margallo-Balbás E, and  Pandraud G, (2021) High-
Performance Akinetic Parallel Light Field Sensor for 3D Imaging. In: Conference on 
Lasers and Electro-Optics, J. Kang, S. Tomasulo, I. Ilev, D. Müller, N. Litchinitser, S. 
Polyakov, V. Podolskiy, J. Nunn, C. Dorrer, T. Fortier, Q. Gan, and C. Saraceno, eds., 
OSA Technical Digest, paper ATu4K.7. 
4. Shaw M, Guo  J, Vawter G, Habermehl S and Sullivan, C, (2005). Fabrication techniques 
for low-loss silicon nitride waveguides. Proceedings of SPIE - The International Society 
for Optical Engineering. 5720.  
5. Tarque, N, Goicolea JM, Cuevas RG, and Martínez JL. (2024) Finite element model 
updating for the dynamic response of continuous deck railway viaducts leading to 
efficient digital twins in XII International Conference on Structural Dynamics, Journal 
of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 2647, p. 102009. 
