 
 
 
 
 
 
Towards laser Doppler vibrometry from  
unmanned aerial vehicles 
Dr Ben J Halkon1 & Prof. Steve J Rothberg2 
1Centre for Audio, Acoustics & Vibration, Faculty of Engineering and IT,  
University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia 
2Wolfson School: Mechanical, Electrical and Manufacturing Engineering,  
Loughborough University, Loughborough, Leics., LE11 3TU, U.K. 
 
Benjamin.Halkon@uts.edu.au 
Abstract. Laser Doppler vibrometers are technically well suited to general application but they 
offer special benefits in a variety of challenging measurement scenarios which are now well 
documented and accepted. An interesting and potentially powerful example of such a challenging 
measurement scenario is one where the laser vibrometer is mounted on/in an unmanned aerial 
vehicle in order that autonomous measurement campaigns can be undertaken in remote and/or 
harsh environments. One important challenge to overcome in such a scenario is the measurement 
sensitivity to vibration of the instrument itself or indeed of any steering optics used to point the 
probe laser beam toward the target of interest. In this paper, recently reported means by which 
this measurement sensitivity can be rectified by simultaneously obtained correction 
measurements will be developed. Specifically, this development is intended to lead towards laser 
Doppler vibrometry from unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) with correction of instrument 
motion being presented herein for the first time from a single, rather than a pair of, uniaxial 
accelerometers.  
1.  Introduction  
Laser Doppler vibrometers (LDVs) measure target surface vibration velocity and are technically well-
suited to general application with benefits over traditional contacting transducers in a range of 
challenging measurement scenarios [1]. Until quite recently [2]-[4], however, little attention had been 
given to i) a quite fundamental aspect of operation which is that the measurement is of velocity relative 
to the instrument itself and ii) measurement scenarios in which interpretation of the data must consider 
instrument or laser beam steering optic motion. Instead, practical application of LDV has typically either 
involved mounting of the instrument on a stable platform, i.e. on a tripod, or, in the case of significant 
levels of ambient (“base motion”) vibration, the use of passive or active anti-vibration mounting 
arrangements [5]. Often such measures will be sufficient to yield high quality outcomes but an 
alternative, in which the instrument vibration can be fully compensated for across a broad frequency 
range, would be clearly preferable. Such compensation would be particularly beneficial where the 
measurement campaign involves the mounting of the instrument onto a platform in which the vibration 
level might be comparable with that of the target of interest, for example when making measurements 
from unmanned or other aerial vehicles. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Previously, comprehensive vector-based mathematical treatments of the velocity measured for both 
scenarios in which significant levels of i) base motion vibration [2] and ii) steering optic vibration [3] 
have been presented. Substantial experimental investigations have conclusively verified both scenarios 
providing practical compensation schemes based on traditional contacting vibration measurement 
transducers which can be conveniently located on the instrument or steering optic itself. For realistic 
vibration levels for both target and instrument/steering optic vibration, reductions of at least 37/47 dB, 
respectively, were demonstrated. Ultimately in both cases, real-world measurements were presented, in 
accordance with conventional noise and vibration engineering paradigms, showing that the required 
accelerometer compensation measurements yield a substantially enhanced understanding of the dynamic 
characteristics of the systems under test.  
More recently, these earlier contributions have been reviewed in such a way that the practising 
vibration engineer might readily realise the measurement error reduction benefits [4]. In the case of 
instrument vibration correction, which is the primary focus of this article, the recommendation up to 
now, given the need to determine the instrument vibration in the direction of the probe laser beam, was 
to mount a pair of accelerometers equidistant around the probe laser beam axis. A single compensation 
accelerometer was shown to be viable in the case of only translational vibration, with angular vibration 
components present resulting in reduced correction performance. A single correction accelerometer 
would, of course, be optimal, indeed certain commercially available systems come complete with a 
mounting location for just such a single “compensation sensor”. In this paper, therefore, a revised 
scheme for complete correction of LDV measurements, taken in the presence of substantial instrument 
vibration, based on the use of a single accelerometer is presented for the first time. A further, novel 
contribution of this paper is to make use of variable capacitance “DC response” accelerometers, rather 
than the previously utilized traditional general-purpose piezoelectric equivalent, for correction.  
2.  Accelerometer relative calibration 
When embarking on a new instrument vibration correction measurement campaign, the first step is to 
“calibrate” the correction transducer(s). Additionally, where a “true” target vibration reference 
measurement is required (to prove the principle of the instrument vibration correction technique [4]) and 
this measurement is to be from a contacting transducer (rather than another, “Fixed LDV” [2]), this also 
applies to the target transducer. Indeed, the full measurement chain must be calibrated and this initial 
transducer “accelerometer relative calibration” stage takes two distinct forms: amplitude and phase 
relative (to the LDV) calibration.  
Firstly, and consistently with all traditional measurement campaigns, the actual sensitivity of the 
accelerometer must be determined. In traditional measurement campaigns, this is achieved using an 
accelerometer calibrator such as the B&K Type 4294. Such devices generate a controlled amplitude 
single frequency component, e.g. a sinusoid at 159.2 Hz (1000 rad/s), against which the output of the 
accelerometer(s) can be verified, and the sensitivity(ies) accordingly adjusted. In the case of instrument 
base motion correction, however, the LDV will be used as the reference vibration (velocity) signal with 
the vibration being (arbitrarily) generated using a broadband (white) noise signal amplified to drive an 
electrodynamic shaker on which the accelerometers are mounted. Figure 1 shows the typical 
experimental arrangement in which the LDV probe laser beam is directly in line with the accelerometer 
sensitive axis (and, of course, positioned at the optimal stand-off distance).  
Using a frequency domain integration approach [2],[3] to convert the accelerometer signal into 
velocity for direct comparison with that of the LDV, the RMS of the difference between the two signals 
within the frequency range of interest (2.5 – 100 Hz in this case) can be determined. The ratio of these 
two values for the accelerometer and the LDV can clearly be used to revise the accelerometer sensitivity 
such that the ratio ultimately becomes 1. Typically, this calculation is performed for a minimum of five 
averages and for two distinct levels of vibration amplitude. Figure 2 shows typical example 
accelerometers vs. LDV data after amplitude calibration. The curves may be challenging to differentiate 
from one another when reproduced in greyscale; that, however, is the very point – that, for each of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
two vibration levels shown, the (integrated) accelerometer signals are indistinguishable from that of the 
LDV.  
 
 
Figure 1. Typical accelerometer calibration experimental arrangement  
(with laser beam path highlighted) 
 
 
Figure 2. Typical amplitude difference comparisons LDV vs. accelerometers 
 
In addition to amplitude calibration, phase differences between the accelerometer and LDV, mostly 
attributed to relative time delays between the signal conditioning electronics in each, also need to be 
accounted for. Broadband calculations are again performed in frequency domain processing. In this case, 
DC response, variable capacitance 
accelerometers
Electrodynamic shaker
Reference laser Doppler vibrometer
1.0E‐04
1.0E‐03
1.0E‐02
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Measured velocity (m/s) 
Frequency (Hz)
LDV
Acc1
Acc2
Acc3
0.5 V
1 V

 
 
 
 
 
 
the absolute unwrapped phase differences between the accelerometer and LDV signals are averaged on 
a frequency-by-frequency basis for a minimum of five averages. The ratio of the mean of these values 
to the mean angular frequency of the frequency range of interest (2.5 – 100 Hz) is the effective time 
delay between the two signals. Figure 3 shows typical phase difference data prior to time delay 
correction. Again, in greyscale these various signals will be challenging to differentiate from one another 
but, again, this is indeed the very point – the three similar accelerometers should be expected to have 
nominally the same characteristics with respect to the LDV. The effect of the finite time delay can be 
seen in these curves as the underlying upward slope. In essence, the algorithm determines the gradient 
of the slope from which the time delay is derived ( = slope gradient / 2); clearly some noise immunity 
is necessary. Taking the mean for two different vibration levels yields values per accelerometer as shown 
in Table 1 below. These values are then readily incorporated into the subsequent frequency domain data 
processing when using the accelerometers to correct the measured, vibrating LDV signal. This will be 
described in the following subsection. 
 
 
Figure 3. Typical phase difference comparisons LDV vs. accelerometers 
 
Table 1. Example accelerometer vs. LDV time delays 
 
3.  Instrument vibration correction 
Sensitivity to instrument vibration (in the direction of the laser beam) was readily confirmed by a 
straightforward experiment, with an arrangement as set out in figure 4. Here, a “Vibrating LDV” sensor 
head was mounted on an electrodynamic shaker and excited with a broadband signal. The speaker cone, 
being relatively lightweight and of small radius of curvature, was fitted with a Dytran 3225F “teardrop” 
piezoelectric accelerometer to provide the ‘true’ “Vibrating target” measurement. With nominally zero 
Acc. model
Acc. s/n
1V
0.5V
Mean
770F‐10‐U‐120
10046
0.137
0.139
0.138
770F‐10‐U‐120
10047
0.136
0.139
0.138
770F‐10‐U‐120
10048
0.139
0.143
0.141
3225F
15763
‐0.044
‐0.046
‐0.045
Time delay (ms)

 
 
 
 
 
 
target vibration, the true accelerometer reference measurement is clearly reflective, as shown in figure 
5, of the target vibration whereas the LDV measurement is not. The LDV measurement is 100% sensitive 
to the vibration of the instrument itself as expected and previously shown in significant detail [2],[4]. 
 
 
Figure 4. Experimental arrangement (a) schematic, (b) overall setup and (c) correction accelerometers 
 
Making use of the same experimental arrangement but now arranging both instrument and target 
vibration (of absolute levels representative of those likely to be experienced in a practical real-world 
measurement scenario), figure 6 clearly shows that the signal measured by the LDV (long dash curve) 
is substantially different to the true target vibration (short dot curve) as expected. Here the most 
significant, approximately one order of magnitude, differences are seen to be between c5 and c20 Hz.  
 
 
Figure 5. LDV vs. true target vibration velocity: instrument vibration, no target vibration 
 
DC response correction 
accelerometer pair
DC response correction 
accelerometer single
(a)
(b)
Target speaker box 
with reference “teardrop”
piezoelectric accelerometer
Vibrating LDV with 
three DC response, 
capacitive accelerometers
Electrodynamic shaker
Data acquisition system
Accelerometer power supply
Vibrating 
LDV
Vibrating 
target
(c)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. LDV vs. true target vibration velocity: instrument vibration and target vibration 
 
As set out in significant theoretical and experimental detail previously [2], for complete correction 
of the erroneous LDV measurement, a simultaneous measurement of the instrument velocity at some 
point along the laser beam axis is required. This can be straightforwardly shown as: 
 ܷ
௖௢௥௥ൌܷ
௠െܷ
଴ 
(1) 
where Um is the measured velocity, Ucorr the corrected velocity and U0 the required correction 
measurement. Given that positioning a single transducer forward of the instrument would clearly result 
in a blocking of the laser beam, the required correction measurement was previously obtained by a pair 
of accelerometers positioned equidistant about, with their sensitivity axes parallel to, the laser beam 
axis.  
Figure 4c shows a practical example of this accelerometer pair positioning strategy where a simple 
bracket and a pair of mounting blocks are used to provide accelerometer mounting locations. In other 
commercially available instruments, mounting is often even more straightforward since the laser beam 
optical axis is typically normal to a flat surface which is the front of the sensor head body. There is such 
a surface on the Polytec NLV-2500 Compact Laser Vibrometer used in this study but it is not sufficiently 
expansive for the relatively large footprint Endevco 770F-10-U-120 variable capacitance 
accelerometers. Figure 4c also shows an alternative instrument vibration compensation sensor 
arrangement based on a single accelerometer mounted on the laser beam axis but behind the instrument 
sensor head. This alternative option is presented and compared with the previously proven accelerometer 
pair here for the first time. 
Integrating these accelerometer measurements in the frequency domain, incorporating the finite time 
delays as set out in Table 1 and subtracting the appropriate correction measurement in accordance with 
equation (1) leads to corrected LDV signals as shown in figure 7. Here, as expected, complete correction 
of the LDV measurement is shown for both cases of the accelerometer pair (bold solid curve with +) 
and the single accelerometer (bold solid curve); indeed, they are indistinguishable from one another. 
The dB reduction in the error is 17.5 dB in both cases. Phase error, as shown in figure 8, is comfortably 
within 100 mrad between 20 and 100 Hz; below 20 Hz phase error is larger as would be expected. 
There is a small exception to the excellent agreement between the corrected LDV signal and the true 
vibration reference measurement and that is in the low frequency region below c10 Hz. Rather than this 

 
 
 
 
 
 
being a problem with the compensation algorithm, this is certainly as a result of the comparatively poor 
low frequency performance of the target piezoelectric accelerometer in that low frequency range (it is 
performing quite acceptably with respect to its specification – it is simply not intended to provide as 
reliable a result as a DC response accelerometer in this low frequency range). When the accelerometer 
signal is integrated, any error in the measured data below 20 Hz is multiplied by a relatively large number 
(1/) and the resulting velocity can be seen to “tick up” whereas the corrected LDV measurement is 
more reliable since both the LDV and the correcting DC response accelerometers have very reliable low 
frequency performance. Future studies will make use of an additional DC response accelerometer or 
another LDV for the “true” reference vibration measurement such that a better agreement is achieved. 
 
 
Figure 7. Corrected LDV measurement for a pair and a single correction accelerometer 
 
Figure 8. Mean phase difference between corrected LDV and true vibration measurements 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Conclusions 
This paper has reviewed the practical means by which an erroneous LDV measurement, due to 
significant levels of instrument vibration, can be corrected by subtracting a simultaneous measurement 
of the instrument vibration at some point along the axis of the laser beam. The means by which the 
required correction accelerometers should be calibrated both in terms of amplitude and phase (finite 
time delay) has been presented with newly obtained measurement data included herein for the first time. 
A measurement scenario, with typical real-world levels of instrument and target vibration, was 
presented, again incorporating data presented herein for the first time. Recommendations for the 
practical application of this, readily deployable by the practising noise and vibration engineer, are 
included. Novelties in this article include the use of DC response accelerometers to provide the 
correction measurement and, the use of a single accelerometer, rather than a pair, mounted behind the 
instrument sensor head. For the vibration levels used, error reduction of 17.5 dB was achieved between 
uncorrected and corrected measurements with phase agreement within 100 mrad between 20 and 100 
Hz.  
In order to achieve better correction at frequencies down to DC, which is important for applications 
such as seismic measurements and handheld application, correction measurement transducers with 
excellent low frequency performance should be utilised. Similarly, comparison measurements of the 
true vibration, for the sake of confirming the validity of the technique, should have equally excellent 
low frequency performance. In future, a DC response accelerometer or another LDV will be used to 
determine the true target vibration. The piezoelectric accelerometer used in this study was chosen for its 
small footprint and light mass which made for easy and reliable attachment to the light speaker cone 
domed surface. However, it has the problem of relatively unreliable low frequency performance after 
integration to velocity (for comparison with the LDV measurement) which causes the signal to “tick-
up” as shown in figures 6 and 7 at frequencies below 5-6 Hz. In order to move “towards LDV from 
unmanned aerial vehicles”, future research will also investigate the extension of the technique presented 
herein to the measurement of transient, rather than only stationary, vibration signals where time, rather 
than frequency, domain processing will clearly need to be developed and deployed. 
5.  References 
[1] 
Rothberg S J et al. 2017 An international review of laser Doppler vibrometry: making light work 
of vibration measurement Opt. and Lasers in Eng. 99 11–22 
[2] 
Halkon B J and Rothberg S J 2017 Taking laser Doppler vibrometry off the tripod: correction of 
measurements affected by instrument vibration Opt. and Lasers in Eng. 91 16–23 
[3] 
Halkon B J and Rothberg S J Restoring high accuracy to laser Doppler vibrometry measurements 
affected by vibration of beam steering optics J. of Sound and Vib. 405 144-157 
[4] 
Halkon B J and Rothberg S J 2018 Taking laser Doppler vibrometry off the tripod. Int. Cong. on 
Sound and Vib. (Hiroshima) 
[5] 
G.M. Revel, P. Castellini, P. Chiariotti, E.P. Tomasini, F. Cenedese and A. Perazzolo 2011 Laser 
vibrometry vibration measurements on vehicle cabins in running conditions: helicopter mock-
up application Opt. Eng. 50 101502-1-14 
[6] 
Polytec GmbH 2017 RSV-150 Remote Sensing Vibrometer product brochure [Online] available: 
https://www.polytec.com/fileadmin/d/Vibrometrie/OM_DS_RSV-150_E_42319.pdf 
(last 
accessed 2-9-18) 
Acknowledgements 
The authors wish to acknowledge the invaluable contributions of Mr Chris Chapman, Scientific 
Officer, Dynamics & Mechanics of Solids Laboratory and Workshop colleagues in the Faculty of 
Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney. 
