Quality-guided UAV Surface Exploration for 3D Reconstruction
Benjamin Sportich¹, Kenza Boubakri¹, Olivier Simonin¹, Alessandro Renzaglia¹
Abstract— Reasons for mapping an unknown environment
with autonomous robots are wide-ranging, but in practice,
they are often overlooked when developing planning strategies.
Rapid information gathering and comprehensive structural as-
sessment of buildings have different requirements and therefore
necessitate distinct methodologies. In this paper, we propose
a novel modular Next-Best-View (NBV) planning framework
for aerial robots that explicitly uses an explicit reconstruction
quality objective to guide the exploration planning. In par-
ticular, our approach introduces new and efficient methods
for view generation and selection of viewpoint candidates
that are adaptive to the user-defined confidence objectives,
exploiting the uncertainty encoded in a Truncated Signed
Distance field (TSDF) representation of the environment. This
results in informed and efficient exploration decisions tailored
towards the predetermined objective. Finally, we validate our
method via extensive simulations in realistic environments. We
demonstrate that it successfully adjusts its behavior to the
user goal while consistently outperforming conventional NBV
strategies in terms of coverage, quality of the final 3D map and
path efficiency.
I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous exploration for 3D reconstruction is a funda-
mental task in robotics, with critical real-world applications
such as infrastructure inspection, mapping, environmental
monitoring, and search-and-rescue missions [1]. In these
scenarios, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) equipped with
onboard visual and range sensors have proven essential
for efficiently navigating complex environments and cap-
turing aerial perspectives that enable comprehensive 3D
reconstructions or a swift survey of an area. Solving this
problem usually involves selecting efficient sequences of
viewpoints that maximize the expected information gain
from new observations, which is particularly challenging in
environments with complex structures and in the absence of
any prior knowledge of their geometry. When using small
UAVs, this task becomes even more difficult due to the
limited computational resources typically available on these
platforms, which require lightweight and efficient algorithms
capable of operating in real time even on large-scale maps.
Despite the variety of applications, exploration and recon-
struction strategies have often been considered as solving the
same problem. However, while several applications require
a balance between the two tasks, their objectives are often
in conflict. The fast coverage needed for search and rescue
applications is typically incompatible with the precise sensor
measurements necessary for high-accuracy reconstruction.
1Inria,
INSA
Lyon,
CITI,
69621
Villeurbanne,
France.
Email:
fistname.lastname@inria.fr
This work has been funded by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche
(ANR), AVENUE project, grant ANR-22-CE33-0004.
Fig. 1.
Illustration of an autonomous exploration and 3D reconstruction
task with an aerial robot. Red points in the free space represent candidate
viewpoints generated to select the next robot’s position, black ones are
surface frontiers within the sensor’s range.
Similarly, the measured pace demanded by infrastructure
inspection is not suitable for emergency use cases. For these
reasons, we present a novel Next-Best-View (NBV) planning
solution that explicitly takes into account the user’s goal
by defining a quality objective for the 3D reconstruction of
the initially unknown and arbitrary environment to explore.
Depending on the initial fixed purpose, our method can
prioritize speed over accuracy, accuracy over speed, or a
balance of the two at every step of the strategy by leveraging
a purpose-designed function.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• A new representation-based formalism reflecting recon-
struction quality and completeness of the built map;
• A novel Next-Best-View approach relying on this for-
malism and able to adapt to the targeted quality both in
the views generation and selection stage;
• An extensive evaluation in both indoor and outdoor
realistic scenarios that demonstrates the competitiveness
of our solution in terms of coverage, speed, and map
accuracy.
II. RELATED WORK
Autonomously exploring an environment and obtaining an
accurate 3D reconstruction of an unknown space are two very
similar yet distinct problems that have been widely studied
in recent years. In both cases, a standard way to tackle these
problems is to adopt an iterative structure called Next-Best-
View (NBV) planning: based on the available partial knowl-
edge of the environment, the most promising future positions
arXiv:2511.20353v3  [cs.RO]  17 May 2026

or portions of paths are selected using a set of criteria and
proxies. Exploration-based solutions are typically evaluated
on speed or volume coverage [2], while reconstruction-based
approaches are evaluated mostly on the deviation from a
ground-truth 3D mesh [3]. In both cases, most existing
solutions, as [2], [3], [4], leverage the seminal concept of
frontiers, first introduced in [5] for 2D environments, to
guide the mission. This concept was then extended to 3D
and specifically for surface reconstruction, by introducing
surface frontiers, which represent the border between empty
and unknown space around the observed geometry. Other
solutions are directly based on sampling-based approaches
in the 3D space. Within this line, the solution presented in
[6] randomly samples the freespace using RRT and iteratively
selects the most promising branch to explore. Although fast
and probabilistically complete due to random sampling, the
quality of views and reconstruction performance of this type
of method are typically lower than those of solutions that
generate views directly from the surface geometry rather than
the free volume. [7] and [4] combine both methods, using
RRT to explore the freespace but sampling around the surface
frontiers to exploit the environment structure. A different
sampling-based solution that approximates a reward function
based on past observations is then presented in [8]. Several
solutions also consider predefined structures, such as a demi-
sphere, to sample views around the target, whether an object
[9] [10] or an outdoor environment [11], assuming a domain
with specific geometric properties. In our work, we propose
a solution that generates views directly based on surface
frontiers and the perceived scene geometry. Additionally, our
experimental evaluation takes place in settings with complex
topologies, without any hypothesis on their structure.
A. Entropy & Heuristics
To select the Next-Best-View among a pool of view
candidates, many evaluation functions have been proposed.
A common and reliable option is to leverage the concept
of entropy by examining all the voxels in the sensor’s
field of view and assessing their individual information gain
based on their occupation probability. In [9], the authors
propose and analyze eight different evaluation functions that
combine distinct criteria and heuristic-based terms. Although
performant, these methods are particularly expensive and
often incompatible with the computational power embedded
on a UAV platform. Thus, they are commonly restricted to
object reconstruction with robot arms. These limitations have
led to the development of different NBV evaluation strategies
for 3D exploration based on heuristics such as occlusion
checks and visible frontiers counts in the field of views [3].
To increase efficiency and reduce unnecessary travels,
some approaches, such as [2], [3], [12], try to compute
an optimal order of visits of available views or sectors of
the map (often relying on an asymmetric TSP model). This
solution involves, however, heavy computational costs to
obtain a still sub-optimal solution, since it remains based
on partial information. A common and lighter alternative to
optimize the robot’s navigation relies on the use of heuristics
that incorporate distance and angular costs, as proposed
in [13]. This approach provides competitive results for a
fraction of the cost of the TSP model.
B. 3D Representations
The design of solutions is also strongly influenced by
the adopted 3D representation, especially for high-quality
reconstruction. Explicit representations, such as the octree-
based occupation grid Octomap [14], can be used for surface
reconstruction and navigation without post-processing. How-
ever, their computational cost quickly becomes very high in
large environments. They have also been successfully used in
NBV approaches designed for single-object reconstruction,
as in [9], [10], with a more tractable cost, but showing some
limitations in terms of accuracy of the final reconstruction.
Lately, the use of Signed Distance Fields, implicit repre-
sentations of the environment, has been largely preferred.
More economical, they allow a greater fidelity through a
finer discretization [15]. Truncated Signed Distance Fields
(TSDF) use projective distances to obstacles within a sparse
voxel grid and model uncertainty. On the other hand, Eu-
clidean Signed Distance Fields (ESDF) use non-projective
distance to obstacles and are particularly efficient for path
planning [16]. [17] and [18], building an ESDF and TSDF
concomitantly, and [19] only creating an ESDF, are standard
libraries for sensor input integration in the literature. Notably,
the solution presented in [20] does not rely on any 3D
representation and reasons directly on point clouds, but its
definition does not allow perceiving empty space and requires
specific processing for occlusion management. In this paper,
we propose a representation-based framework exploiting the
characteristics of SDF, as motivated in the next section.
To our knowledge, our solution is the first to propose
an NBV approach that adapts both view generation and
selection to a required confidence level on the final map.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
We consider an aerial robot equipped with a depth sensor
with a limited Field-of-View (FoV) characterized by a max-
imum and minimum range rmax and rmin, respectively. We
assume access to a perfect localization system at all times
in a reference frame that we will call the world frame. The
robot’s goal is to reconstruct the 3D surface of an unknown
environment in the minimum time possible while taking into
account predefined quality objectives. The environment is
initially unknown and we represent the scene as a triangular
mesh M = {T,O} built on a pointcloud with mesh vertices
O = {o1,o2,...,o|O|} and a set of faces T = {t1,t2,...,t|T|},
where ti ∈V ×V ×V, following the definition in [11]. We call
Z the quality measure of the 3D reconstruction, based on the
built map M, which will be later formally defined. Let q ∈
SE(3) be the pose of the robot and q0 its initial configuration.
q is defined by a position sq ∈R3 and orientation φq ∈R3.
Reconstruction problem: Considering our UAV with
initial configuration q0 ∈Q, the reconstruction problem asks
to identify S = ( ˆQ, ˆPˆQ), a set of poses and the corresponding

collision-free paths which allow the agent to reach a prede-
fined quality of reconstruction Z∗in a minimum time.
The quality measure of the reconstruction and the corre-
sponding minimum threshold can be tailored depending on
the exact application and constraints of the problem. In this
section, we will detail the design of our proposed Z function.
We consider a volumetric map M of the environment based
on a discretized voxel grid of the 3D space. A voxel, of size
ds, can refer to free, occupied, or unknown space. We follow
the general definition of surface frontiers given in [3]:
Definition 1 (Incomplete Surface Element): An Incom-
plete Surface Element (ISE), is a voxel i ∈M lying on the
surface at a frontier, near both the unknown and empty space.
Let C be the set of all ISEs, a voxel i ∈C if and only if:
• i is empty,
• ∃i′ ∈N 6
i s.t. i′ is unknown,
• ∃i′′ ∈N 18
i
s.t. i′′ is occupied,
where N 6
i
and N 18
i
denote the 6- and 18-connected voxel
neighborhoods of i, respectively. The definition of an empty,
unknown, occupied voxel is dependent on the map represen-
tation and we will detail this further below.
Definition 2 (Remaining Incomplete Surface): Let Q be
the set of all collision-free configurations of an agent, and
let Qc ⊆Q be the set of all configurations from which an
ISE i ∈C can be scanned. The remaining incomplete surface
is then defined as:
Crem =
[
i∈C
{i | Qc = /0}.
(1)
A. Reconstruction Quality in TSDF
To represent the map, we use a Truncated Signed Distance
Field (TSDF), where each voxel i ∈M is represented by an
aggregated projected distance di to the closest obstacle and a
weight wi, which serves as a measure of confidence intance.
Within a TSDF representation, a voxel i is considered:
• empty, if wi > 0 and di > ds (voxel size),
• occupied, if wi > 0 and di < ds,
• unknown, if wi = 0.
The choice of a TSDF representation is justified by several
reasons. First, a TSDF implicitly represents the surfaces
but explicitly models the confidence in the progressively
built map, which is crucial in assessing the accuracy of the
reconstruction online. In addition, the seminal work [21] has
extensively studied the impact of the sensors’ uncertainty in
reconstruction problems. These results are now commonly
used to integrate the sensor input, as done for instance
in [17] and [18], two widely-used TSDF implementations
for UAV exploration and reconstruction. It is important
to note that the TSDF representation has been proved to
be equivalent to the least squares minimization of squared
distances between points on the range surfaces and points
on the desired reconstruction under the specific conditions
of an orthographic sensor and a range error independently
distributed along the line of sight of the sensors [15]. Hence,
although the TSDF weights wi are not a direct geometric
error metric, we propose to use them to define a function
Z(M) which acts as an efficient proxy for a quality measure
of the reconstructed isosurface:
Z(M) = ξ(M) ¯Z = ξ(M) ∑
i∈MS
wi
|MS|
(2)
where MS is the set of observed surface voxels in M and
ξ(M) = 0 if ∃i such that i ∈C and i /∈Crem, and ξ(M) = 1 in
all other cases. As a result, ξ(M) evaluates the completeness
of the surface reconstruction and ¯Z represents the average
confidence in the obtained map. Contrary to a quality func-
tion incorporating directly distance errors or surface normals
that can only be known a posteriori, our proxy function can
be used online to evaluate a partial map.
Using the function in equation (2) can however lead to
overestimating the overall accuracy of a map, where some
parts of unnecessarily high confidence compensate for lower-
accuracy areas. We thus define the following modified quality
evaluation function Zsat(M;w∗):
Zsat(M;w∗) = ξ(M) ¯Zsat = ξ(M) ∑
i∈MS
min(wi;w∗)
|MS|
(3)
where w∗is a predefined confidence goal. Using this formu-
lation, we can formulate our problem as finding the shortest
path that maximizes the function (3) given a predefined
confidence objective w∗. Note that Z∗:= max(Zsat) = w∗.
Although this optimization problem cannot be solved di-
rectly, the following section presents an online NBV planning
approach that aims to achieve the same objective.
IV. PROPOSED APPROACH
To reconstruct or explore an unknown environment, Next-
Best-Views solutions proceed iteratively: based on the partial
map of the environment available at a given time, they
select the viewpoint that will bring the most expected in-
formation and thus reduce mission time. Viewpoints are
generally constructed around frontier points, borders between
the unknown space and the known surface, that constitute
intuitively highly informative viewing zones. Typically, the
process consists of successively identifying frontier points,
generating viewpoints around them, which exploits the struc-
ture of the known map, and finally selecting the next robot
pose among all the potential destinations. Repeating this
process involves moving from one locally optimal view
candidate to another, according to considerations about the
unknown surface and metric distance penalties to reduce
back-and-forth motions. In this work, we introduce a novel
way to determine locally optimal views by incorporating
explicitly user-defined quality requirements in this procedure.
To this end, we designed a new quality objective function to
maximize, which is used at each step of the process to orient
the exploration towards the chosen quality goal.
Our objective function Zsat(M;w∗) encompasses two crite-
ria: complete exploration and high-confidence reconstruction.
With a limited time, these objectives are at odds, as the
former requires fast traversal of unknown spaces and the
latter requires careful observation of sometimes complex
geometry. Typically, these conflicting goals may also require

different viewing distances of the target. A fast exploration
strategy favors high-distance observations, maximizing un-
known space sensing, while a reconstruction method requires
closer observation points in search for accuracy. These com-
plexities are reflected in our function design. By setting a
quality objective Z∗that informs both the generation and the
evaluation of viewpoints, the user can calibrate the speed and
reconstruction fidelity according to their preferences. A Z∗
tending to 0 would orient the planning towards an aggressive
exploration strategy, while a value closer to 1 would make
the exploration slower, careful and progressive.
A. Use of Z∗to Guide the Exploration
Our objective function Zsat, defined in eq. (3), is built
on the TSDF representation and exploits the associated
confidence estimates encoded in the weights wi. Leveraging
the results presented in [22], the confidence of a given mea-
surement is typically set to 1/d2, where d is the measurement
depth. For example, this is the case for the TSDF library
Voxblox [17] that we adopt in our work. Based on this model,
to obtain a confidence w∗for a given surface voxel would
be sufficient to observe it from a distance d∗equal to:
d∗= min(
p
1/w∗,rmax).
(4)
On the map level, this relation implies that, if all surface
voxels are observed at a distance of d∗or less at least
once, then Z ≥Z∗. When Z∗is close to 0, d∗would
correspond to the maximum range of the sensor, meaning
voxels can be observed from any distance and still satisfy
the quality requirements. On the other hand, if Z∗is close
to 1, then d∗will be close to the sensor’s minimum range.
It is important to note that a given confidence level could
also be achieved with multiple observations obtained from
distances greater than d∗(see [17] for more details on the
weight update rule). Although it is not possible to define a
priori the optimal observation distance to reach a predefined
Z∗in the shortest possible time, we will use d∗as our
reference observation distance to guide both view generation
and evaluation. In practice, we define a viewing distance
interval [d∗−η;d∗+ η] with η > 0, and our strategy aims
for a complete exploration via the generation and selection
of views within this viewing distance interval.
B. View Generation
When the robot starts its exploration or is about to reach
the current goal position and orientation, the map is exam-
ined, and a view candidate is generated for every surface
frontier (ISE voxel as in Definition 1) identified in the map.
A view candidate v ∈SE(3) is defined by a position sv ∈R3
and an orientation φv ∈R3. In contrast to sampling-based
approaches that sample randomly in freespace, frontier-
based views exploit the geometry of the environment to
propose efficient and safe observation poses. Three points
are sampled along the normal of the surface frontiers points
at different viewing distances d: in a close range d < d∗−η,
in an optimal range (d ∈[d∗−η;d∗+η]), and at long range
(d > d∗+η). Points within the optimal range, then close and
Fig. 2. Vertical and horizontal rotation for the view generation. (The red and
green arrows indicate, respectively, a direction from the frontier to a view
candidate whose vertical angle is incompatible with the sensor’s opening,
and the corrected direction toward an adjusted view candidate. The green
circle represents the sampling space of view candidates with a valid vertical
angle and viewing distance to the frontier.
long range, are checked for safety in this respective order.
This order is in accordance with the satisfaction of the aimed
quality threshold. Once a valid position is found, the process
is stopped and moves to the next frontier.
In signed distance fields, the normal of a surface point
is equal to the gradient direction at the position of the
corresponding surface voxel. Typical gradient calculation
methods of forward and central difference, although com-
putationally efficient, do not perform well in an exploration
context, because of the perturbation of unknown voxels
surrounding the surface. We chose to implement the gradient
calculation developed in [3], which exploits all neighbors and
incorporates uncertainty. The surface normal direction ni of
the surface frontier i is computed as:
ni = ∑
j∈N 26
i
w(j)
j −i
||j −i||
(5)
with N 26
i
the set of 26-neighbors of i and w(j) = −wj if j
is occupied and equals to wj otherwise.
If no admissible view is found due to the close vicinity of
obstacles within the robot’s radius or if the incidence angle
is not aligned with the sensor FoV, the sampling direction
ni is then rotated horizontally and/or vertically (see Fig.
2). Notably, if the vertical angle falls outside the FoV, the
surface normal vector is rotated by the necessary angle in
the corresponding plane to bring it back in the center of
the field of view before performing a collision check. In
this way, all the generated views are compatible with the
robot’s sensing capabilities. If for the frontier i, sv fails the
collision check, we horizontally rotate the viewing direction
ni around the vertical axis centered on the frontier i. Any
new view candidate for i of position s′
v is sampled from the
circle obtained through this rotation. This process ensures
that neither the vertical angle nor the distance to the frontier
(||s′
v −i|| = ||sv −i||) are modified. The set of generated
candidate viewpoints is called V.
C. View Evaluation
The view candidates generated in V are then evaluated
according to an information gain component JI and a navi-

gation component JN. The selected view v∗is the view that
maximizes the function J that combines these two terms, i.e.:
v∗= argmax
v∈V
J(v) = argmax
v∈V
α JI(v)+β JN(v)
(6)
with α,β ∈[0;1]. Considering the significant number of view
candidates, an evaluation function needs to both discriminate
efficiently and be computationally tractable, as the size of V
can grow exponentially with the size of the map.
1) Information Gain Component: Information gain eval-
uation functions can be sorted into two main categories:
entropy-based and frontier-based. In Section II-A, we dis-
cussed the prohibitive cost of entropy-dependent solutions for
large environments in comparison to frontier-based methods.
For this reason, our information gain model is based on
frontiers, but does not limit itself to counting visible frontiers
in the field of view. Our function is guided by the objective
quality Z∗, which considers viewing distance and visibility
probabilities due to occlusions to differentiate views.
A voxel i is generally called occluded from a view
candidate v if along the ray from v to i there is at least one
occupied voxel. We define Fv ⊂F the set of non-occluded
frontiers from the pose of the view candidate v, and δv,f the
binary variable equals 1 if f ∈Fv and 0 otherwise. However,
this definition of occlusion does not take into account the
possible occlusion of unknown voxels along the ray that
could be occupied. We thus define the function vis(v, f)
estimating the visibility of the target frontier f from the
view candidate v, considering the potential occlusions due
to unknown voxels, as follows:
vis(v, f) = δv,f e−u
(7)
with u being the number of unknown voxels along the ray
from the sensor pose v to the target frontier f. Using these
definitions, we define the information gain function JI(v) as:
JI(v) =
1
max
v∈V |Fv| ∑
f∈F
hv(f)vis(v, f)
(8)
where
hv(f) =







1
if |d(f,sv)−d∗| < η
0.5
if d(f,sv) < d∗−η
0.5

1−d(f,sv)
rmax

if d(f,sv) > d∗+η
(9)
The function h prioritizes view candidates that observe fron-
tiers from a distance close to d∗. Views at farther distances
are penalized, as they do not satisfy the quality criteria.
Closer viewing distances do satisfy the quality criteria, but
have fewer voxels in the field of view. Hence, they are also
penalized, although less significantly.
2) Navigation component: During the exploration, a ma-
jor fallback is to return to previously visited areas to observe
a missed portion of the surface, generating additional and
unnecessary travel. Furthermore, the position sv of the view
candidate v can be close in distance to the actual robot
position sq ∈R3 but facing the opposite direction. Moving
to that view would incur a costly change in direction with a
Fig. 3.
Overview of the main components of the proposed approach.
trajectory that cannot be a straight line. To generate efficient
trajectories, we include both of these aspects in the design
of our navigation component JN:
JN(q,v) = ψ(q,v)
min
v∈V ||sv −sq||
||sv −sq||
(10)
where
ψ(q,v) = 1−1
π arccos
 velT
||vel|| ·
sv −sq
||sv −sq||

(11)
with vel being the velocity vector of the robot.
D. Local Planning
To represent the 3D space as a 3D map, we adopt ETHZ
ASL’s Voxblox representation [17], which builds a TSDF
and an ESDF concomitantly. The TSDF is used for the
reconstruction reasoning and the ESDF by the navigation
component to determine the freespace. We use the local plan-
ner from [23] to generate dynamically feasible trajectories
and replan in real-time to avoid obstacles. The local planner
has two main components: first, the local trajectory optimizer
that computes the best path between two waypoints without
collisions. This trajectory is then smoothed out using the
loco smoother [23] to respect the velocity and acceleration
constraints. Then, the intermediate goal selector creates sub-
sections of the path between the current UAV pose and the
goal and sends them one by one to the UAV’s controller.
To improve the UAV’s navigation and obstacle avoidance,
we have added a component that computes a freespace
pointcloud from the UAV sensor’s original pointcloud. First,
the maximum range of the sensor is used to recreate a ”full”
pointcloud. Then, it is compared to the actual sensor input.
Specifically, any point in the full pointcloud that lies in
the same direction as a detected point from the sensor data
but is farther away is removed. This freespace pointcloud
gives additional information about the navigable environment
perceived by the UAV and is passed to Voxblox to enhance
the quality of the ESDF and TSDF. Making a difference
between empty and unknown space is also crucial to assess
occlusion within the information gain calculation.
An overview of the global architecture, including the sens-
ing, mapping, planning, and control components, is shown
in Fig. 3.

Online-IPP
Ours
Ours (average)
Online-IPP (max)
Online-IPP (min)
Fig. 4.
House and Tunnel environments (ground-truth mesh) with 15-minute trajectories.
V. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we test and analyze our method in differ-
ent simulated environments with varying characteristics. To
assess the efficiency of our approach, we compare its perfor-
mance against three methods from the literature: an informa-
tive sampling method based on RTT* [4], and two classical
heuristic baselines. The first baseline evaluates viewpoints by
counting the number of visible frontiers from that position
using raycasting. Intuitive but costly, it is adopted by several
state-of-the-art approaches, as [3] and [2]. The second one
consists of always selecting the closest generated viewpoint
as the next destination, which has consistently performed
on-par with recent methods [24]. For the view generation of
these methods, we use the state-of-the-art method detailed in
[2], which adopts a cylindrical sampling around the frontier.
A. Simulation setup
Performance evaluations were performed in ROS1-Gazebo
simulation with a quadrotor UAV equipped with a 3D LIDAR
providing a full 360-degree horizontal field of view (FOV)
and a vertical FOV ranging from -35 to +30 degrees. The
UAV model is based on an Intelaero UAV, using the same
motor placement and dimensions. To guide the UAV in
Gazebo, we designed a controller that follows the given
trajectory perfectly. This perfect controller is used to prevent
navigation bias when comparing the different approaches in
simulation. We assume perfect localization as in all the major
works of the field from the literature [4], [3], [2].
The experimental results presented in this paper took place
in the following simulated worlds:
• House: a 45x40x20m outdoor open field urban environ-
ment composed of a house, two cars, and a complex
playground structure. All elements are dispersed within
the map and disconnected, except for the ground sur-
face. Object shapes are quite complex.
• Tunnel: a 200x200x4m indoor structured terrain with a
large cubic room and a narrow tunnel entry point. The
tunnel splits into 3 sections that remerge further. This
world requires a more precise navigation and combines
an almost open area and narrow corridors.
These two environments have been selected for their chal-
lenging and deeply different characteristics. The scattered
objects of interest in ”House” and the combination of both a
wide open room and multiple branching narrow corridors in
”Tunnel” create complex topologies where the robot must
efficiently prioritize the views to select. Typically, in the
”House” environment, the empty ground surface should be
covered quickly to focus on the more complex geometry of
the objects within the scene. In ”Tunnel”, the variety within
the environment requires a strategy that can efficiently handle
both wide and tight spaces for view selection and navigation.
Additionally, the spaced objects in ”House” and the scale
of ”Tunnel” can easily induce unnecessary back-and-forth
motions. The mission time has been limited to 15 minutes
for both environments. This time limit is intentionally short
in order to evaluate the ability of the approaches to prioritize
regions of interest within a limited time frame.
Across all experiments and scenes, we keep the same
values of α = β = 0.5. Other simulation parameters are
detailed in Table I.
Parameter
Value
Robot Radius
1.0 m
Voxel Size ds
0.25 m
Lidar Min/Max Range rmin,rmax
0.42m / 10m
Vertical Min/Max Angle
-35° / 30°
Maximum velocity vmax
4.5 m/s
Maximum absolute acceleration amax
4.8 m/s²
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
B. Metrics
The quality of a reconstructed map is judged on its
completeness and its fidelity. For this reason, we divide our
evaluation into two steps. First, we compare our solution
to the other methods with respect to coverage and speed.
Namely, we rely on the following three metrics: coverage
ratio, distance traveled, and mean map error. To evaluate
coverage, we compare the TSDF map obtained at the end of
the execution with a TSDF ground truth containing all the
observable surfaces, obtained through a manual traversal of

the environments. We extract all the surface voxels of the
ground-truth map in the set Msur face. A voxel in Msur face
is covered if the distance value difference between the same
voxel in the ground-truth and the evaluated map is less than
the voxel diagonal. The map error is the average distance
error across all surface voxels of the ground truth map.
The second part of our analysis focuses on map accuracy
and is based on two metrics: the function Z(M) expressed
in eq. (2), and the percentage distance ∆between the value
of the objective function Zsat(M;w∗) corresponding to the
final map, and its optimal value Z∗. In both cases, the com-
pleteness factor is approximated to ξ(M) = |MS|/Msur face.
Since none of the methods is deterministic, each experiment
has been repeated five times, and the averaged values are
reported in Tables II, III, and IV.
C. Results
1) Performance comparison: The first conclusion that can
be drawn from the first set of comparative results presented in
Table II is that our proposed approach outperforms the other
three methods in terms of coverage for both environments
while maintaining a similar mean error. In ”Tunnel” notably,
our approach covers 86% more surface voxels than the
second-best approach. The performance differences are less
pronounced in ”House”, which is closer to a standard open
environment, but rise drastically in ”Tunnel”. This is due
to the fact that, in our simulations, all the other methods
struggle transitioning from the wide room to the narrow
tunnel shaft and lose a large amount of time (see Fig. 4).
Random sampling methods do not manage to efficiently
cover some hard-to-see surfaces, located at the bottom of
the room walls, highlighting the benefits of surface-based
view generation. It should be noted that for Online-IPP [4],
there is significant variability between instances. In most of
our experiments, it hardly enters the tunnel shaft and remains
in the main room for most of the mission time (see Fig. 4).
However, when it manages to find the tunnel entrance, its
speed of exploration in the narrow corridor is unmatched by
the other methods, including ours, despite significant back
and forth. Our approach is the most consistent, as our high
coverage ratio demonstrates, and with the best path efficiency
overall in all environments (see Fig. 4, Table II) across all
methods. In particular, our paths are 3 to 4 times shorter than
Online-IPP’s and provide better coverage. We can finally note
that a quality objective corresponding to half the field of view
of the sensor proves to be a good balance between speed and
accuracy, as demonstrated by the values of Z in Table II.
2) Adaptation to the quality objective: For the second
part of our analysis, we consider the percentage distance
∆to different quality objectives obtained using different
observation distance intervals dobs ± η: close-range (1.5m),
middle-range (4.5m), and high-range (8.5m) with η always
0.5m. We also measure the performance of two versions
of closest frontiers and frontiers count: one with a large
sampling range of 3 to 8 meters for view generation, and a
version with a smaller range of 4 to 5 meters. These results
are presented in Tables III and IV for the House and Tunnel
environment respectively. For readability purposes, and given
its direct relation with d∗, we use the value of
p
1/Z∗instead
of Z∗to specify the considered quality objective.
When the observation distance increases, our solution cov-
erage increases significantly: in ”House”, the best-performing
method in terms of coverage is ours, with a high range. In
”Tunnel”, ours-middle-range is also the top performer (we
did not evaluate a high-range as the narrow corridors of the
tunnel do not allow it). However, as expected, when observ-
ing from higher ranges, the accuracy of the observed map
worsens. Conversely, with the smallest range of observation,
our exploration is slower, but the map fidelity increases.
In ”House”, ours (d∗∈[1;2]), is slower but has the best
accuracy of all the strategies with an error 2 to 4 times
inferior to the other methods (ours excluded). For higher
observation ranges, our method always has a distance to the
quality objective of 0.01% or less, but with the corresponding
confidence value being very small, the comparison between
strategies appears less significant. In ”Tunnel”, ours-close-
range (dobs ∈[1;2]) has a higher distance to the quality target
than ours-middle-range (dobs ∈[4;5]). The small value of dobs
in the narrow corridors causes big angle changes between
views, which generates a higher error. In general, we can
notice that our approach is either the fastest to cover the
environments or the one that achieves the best accuracy,
depending on the corresponding quality target.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we presented a novel, quality-guided frame-
work for exploring and reconstructing unknown environ-
ments using an aerial robot equipped with a range sen-
sor. The proposed NBV approach enables the robot to
adapt its selection of future observation points based on
the perceived environment and user-specified reconstruction
fidelity requirements, achieving a more efficient and task-
driven exploration. We tested the proposed approach in a
series of experiments involving diverse environments and
quality objectives and compared it to state-of-the-art standard
alternatives. Our extensive results showed that our method
effectively adjusts exploration efficiency and reconstruction
accuracy while consistently outperforming alternative meth-
ods in both map coverage and final accuracy, demonstrating
the value of incorporating quality criteria into the design of
planning algorithms.
In the future, we plan to expand our approach to guide
multiple UAVs as a team to obtain scalable and cooperative
solutions for exploring and reconstructing large-scale, com-
plex environments.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Quattrini Li, “Exploration and mapping with groups of robots:
Recent trends,” Current Robotics Reports, vol. 1, no. 4, 2020.
[2] B. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, and S. Shen, “FUEL: Fast UAV explo-
ration using incremental frontier structure and hierarchical planning,”
IEEE Robotics and Autom. Letters, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 779–786, 2021.
[3] G. Hardouin, J. Moras, F. Morbidi, J. Marzat, and E. M. Mouaddib,
“A multirobot system for 3-d surface reconstruction with centralized
and distributed architectures,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39,
no. 4, pp. 2623–2638, 2023.

Methods
House
Coverage
Tunnel
Coverage
House
Path length
Tunnel
Path length
House
Map Error
Tunnel
Map Error
House
Z
Tunnel
Z
Ours (d∗= 4.5m)
9507 (86.3%)
54850 (71.5%)
228.6
411.8
3,74%
4,84%
0.83
0.71
Online-IPP [4]
8681 (78.8%)
22865 (29.8%)
731
819
3,64%
5,11%
0.75
0.3
Closest frontier (small spread)
7881 (71.6%)
29437 (38.4%)
195.6
233.8
3,85%
5,16%
0.69
0.38
Closest frontier (large spread)
8221 (74.7%)
18950 (24.71%)
242.4
163
3.66%
4.01%
0.72
0.24
Frontier count (small spread)
7857 (71.4%)
26822 (34.9%)
230.2
187.8
3,63%
4,66%
0.68
0.35
Frontier count (large spread)
9377 (85.21%)
26266 (34.25%)
245.8
182.66
3,75%
4,78%
0.83
0.34
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ACROSS DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENTS.
Methods (House)
∆(
p
1/Z∗= 1)
∆(2)
∆(4)
∆(5)
∆(8)
Coverage
Ours (dobs = 1.5±0.5m)
1.33%
0.19%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
69.37%
Ours (dobs = 4.5±0.5m)
3.79%
0.79%
0.01%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
86.39%
Ours (dobs = 8.5±0.5m)
13.93%
3.76%
0.33%
0.07%
≤0.01%
99.62%
Online-IPP [4]
4.77%
1.07%
0.07%
0.01%
≤0.01%
78.8%
Frontier count (large spread)
2.75%
0.52%
0.01%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
74.7%
Frontier count (small spread)
5.14%
1.18%
0.04%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
71.4%
Closest frontier (large spread)
4.03%
0.67%
0.01%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
85.21%
Closest frontier (small spread)
3.99%
0.75%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
71.6%
TABLE III
DISTANCE TO QUALITY OBJECTIVES FOR EACH APPROACH IN THE HOUSE ENVIRONMENT.
Methods (Tunnel)
∆(
p
1/Z∗= 1)
∆(2)
∆(4)
∆(5)
∆(8)
Coverage
Ours (dobs = 1.5±0.5m)
0.85%
0.13%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
41.58%
Ours (dobs = 4.5±0.5m)
0.26%
0.02%
0.01%
0.01%
≤0.01%
71.5%
Online-IPP [4]
0.56%
0.04%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
29.8%
Frontier count (large spread)
0.71%
0.06%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
34.25%
Closest frontier (large spread)
1.15%
0.14%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
≤0.01%
24.71%
TABLE IV
DISTANCE TO QUALITY OBJECTIVE FOR EACH APPROACH IN THE TUNNEL ENVIRONMENT.
[4] L. Schmid, M. Pantic, R. Khanna, L. Ott, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto,
“An efficient sampling-based method for online informative path
planning in unknown environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1500–1507, 2020.
[5] B. Yamauchi, “A frontier-based approach for autonomous exploration,”
in IEEE International Symposium on Computational Intelligence in
Robotics and Automation, 1997, pp. 146–151.
[6] A. Bircher et al., “Receding horizon path planning for 3d exploration
and surface inspection,” Autonomous Robots, 2018.
[7] M. Selin, M. Tiger, D. Duberg, F. Heintz, and P. Jensfelt, “Efficient
autonomous exploration planning of large-scale 3-D environments,”
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1699–1706, 2019.
[8] A. Renzaglia, J. Dibangoye, V. Le Doze, and O. Simonin, “Combining
stochastic optimization and frontiers for aerial multi-robot exploration
of 3D terrains,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2019, pp. 4121–4126.
[9] J. Delmerico et al., “A comparison of volumetric information gain
metrics for active 3d object reconstruction,” Autonomous Robots, 2018.
[10] S. Pan and H. Wei, “A global max-flow-based multi-resolution next-
best-view method for reconstruction of 3d unknown objects,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 714–721, 2022.
[11] C. Peng and V. Isler, “Adaptive view planning for aerial 3D reconstruc-
tion,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Rob. & Autom. (ICRA), 2019, pp. 2981–87.
[12] B. Tang et al., “Bubble explorer: Fast uav exploration in large-
scale and cluttered 3D-environments using occlusion-free spheres,” in
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2023.
[13] J. Yu, H. Shen, J. Xu, and T. Zhang, “ECHO: An efficient heuristic
viewpoint determination method on frontier-based autonomous explo-
ration for quadrotors,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 8,
no. 8, pp. 5047–5054, 2023.
[14] A. Hornung et al., “Octomap: an efficient probabilistic 3d mapping
framework based on octrees,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 34, no. 3, pp.
189–206, 2013.
[15] B. Curless and M. Levoy, “A volumetric method for building complex
models from range images,” in Proceedings of the 23rd Annual
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, ser.
SIGGRAPH ’96, 1996, p. 303–312.
[16] N. Ratliff, M. Zucker, J. A. Bagnell, and S. Srinivasa, “CHOMP:
Gradient optimization techniques for efficient motion planning,” in
IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2009, pp. 489–494.
[17] H. Oleynikova, Z. Taylor, M. Fehr, J. Nieto, and R. Siegwart,
“Voxblox: Incremental 3d euclidean signed distance fields for on-board
mav planning,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017, pp. 1366–1373.
[18] Y. Pan, Y. Kompis, L. Bartolomei, R. Mascaro, C. Stachniss, and
M. Chli, “Voxfield: Non-projective signed distance fields for online
planning and 3d reconstruction,” in IEEE/RSJ International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2022, pp. 5331–5338.
[19] L. Han, F. Gao, B. Zhou, and S. Shen, “Fiesta: Fast incremental
euclidean distance fields for online motion planning of aerial robots,”
in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), 2019, pp. 4423–4430.
[20] R. Border and J. D. Gammell, “The surface edge explorer (SEE): A
measurement-direct approach to next best view planning,” The Int.
Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 1506–1532, 2022.
[21] R. Newcombe et al., “Kinectfusion: Real-time dense surface mapping
and tracking,” in 10th IEEE international symposium on mixed and
augmented reality, 2011, pp. 127–136.
[22] C. V. Nguyen, S. Izadi, and D. Lovell, “Modeling kinect sensor
noise for improved 3d reconstruction and tracking,” in International
conference on 3D imaging, modeling, processing, visualization &
transmission.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 524–530.
[23] H. Oleynikova, Z. Taylor, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto, “Safe local
exploration for replanning in cluttered unknown environments for
micro-aerial vehicles,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2018.
[24] D. Duberg and P. Jensfelt, “Ufoexplorer: Fast and scalable sampling-
based exploration with a graph-based planning structure,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 2487–2494, 2022.
