FC-Planner: A Skeleton-guided Planning Framework for
Fast Aerial Coverage of Complex 3D Scenes
Chen Feng2, Haojia Li2, Mingjie Zhang1, Xinyi Chen2, Boyu Zhou1,†, and Shaojie Shen2
Abstract— 3D coverage path planning for UAVs is a crucial
problem in diverse practical applications. However, existing
methods have shown unsatisfactory system simplicity, com-
putation efficiency, and path quality in large and complex
scenes. To address these challenges, we propose FC-Planner,
a skeleton-guided planning framework that can achieve fast
aerial coverage of complex 3D scenes without pre-processing.
We decompose the scene into several simple subspaces by a
skeleton-based space decomposition (SSD). Additionally, the
skeleton guides us to effortlessly determine free space. We
utilize the skeleton to efficiently generate a minimal set of
specialized and informative viewpoints for complete cover-
age. Based on SSD, a hierarchical planner effectively divides
the large planning problem into independent sub-problems,
enabling parallel planning for each subspace. The carefully
designed global and local planning strategies are then in-
corporated to guarantee both high quality and efficiency in
path generation. We conduct extensive benchmark and real-
world tests, where FC-Planner computes over 10 times faster
compared to state-of-the-art methods with shorter path and
more complete coverage. The source code will be made publicly
available to benefit the community3. Project page: https:
//hkust-aerial-robotics.github.io/FC-Planner.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have become
increasingly popular to gather information of target scenes
for various tasks, such as structural inspection [1, 2] and
3D reconstruction [3], due to their agility and flexibility. To
accomplish these tasks, UAVs need to find a shortest path
to fully cover 3D scenes, which is typically formulated as a
3D coverage path planning problem [4].
Existing works [1, 2, 5]–[10] commonly address this
problem by dividing it into two sub-tasks: 1) identifying
a set of viewpoints that cover the target scene, 2) deter-
mining the shortest path with complete coverage. How-
ever, current solutions for these sub-tasks have limitations
that hinder the attainment of satisfactory system simplicity,
computation efficiency, and path quality. For the first sub-
task, existing methods require pre-processing using extra
tools (e.g., Blender [11], CloudCompare [12]) to extract
free space for ensuring the safety of viewpoints, which
increases system complexity. Moreover, there is a dearth
of an efficient strategy that can produce a minimal set of
informative viewpoints comprehensively covering the target
1School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-Sen University, Zhuhai, China.
2Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.
{cfengag, hlied, xchencq, eeshaojie}@ust.hk,
zagerzhang@gmail.com, zhouby23@mail.sysu.edu.cn
† Corresponding Author
3https://github.com/HKUST-Aerial-Robotics/FC-Planner
Fig. 1.
(a) An aerial coverage test conducted in a challenging scene. (b)
Showcase of space decomposition details and coverage trajectory.
scene. Existing approaches suffer from a trade-off between
viewpoints’ number and completeness, i.e., a small number
of viewpoints cannot guarantee complete coverage while
large amount incurs significant computational costs. On the
other hand, the path planner in most frameworks globally
optimizes a path fully covering the scene with minimum
length, typically formulated as a Combinatorial Optimization
Problem (COP) [13]. However, due to the large scale of the
planning problem, existing methods frequently struggle to
find high-quality solutions promptly in large and complex
scenes. Presently, there is a pressing demand for an efficient
planning approach in the context of complex 3D scene cover-
age, which should be capable of decomposing the formidable
planning problem into parallelizable sub-problems, ensuring
both solution quality and computational efficiency.
To tackle the above limitations, we propose FC-Planner,
a skeleton-guided planning framework tailored for fast cov-
erage of large and complex 3D scenes. Central to our method
is the skeleton-based space decomposition (SSD), which
efficiently extracts the skeleton of target scenes. The skeleton
provides useful guidance in two aspects. Firstly, it is located
inside the target scene, enabling effortless differentiation be-
tween internal and external spaces, eliminating the necessity
for the pre-processing of free space. Secondly, the skeleton
decomposes the complex scene into subspaces characterized
by simple geometry. Then, viewpoint sampling rays orig-
inated from the skeleton of each subspace are employed
to generate specialized viewpoints, thus avoiding redundant
sampling of viewpoints and mismatches between viewpoints
and their corresponding subspaces. Further, a gravitation-like
method is designed to screen out a minimal set of informative
viewpoints. Leveraging the straightforward geometry of each
subspace and its dedicated set of viewpoints, our approach
effectively divides the entire coverage path planning problem
into parallelizable sub-problems. This, in conjunction with
arXiv:2309.13882v3  [cs.RO]  10 Sep 2024

Fig. 2.
The overview of the proposed skeleton-guided planning framework for fast aerial coverage in complex 3D scenes.
our carefully designed global and local planning procedures,
results in the generation of high-quality coverage paths and
high computational efficiency.
We compare our proposed method with state-of-the-art
works in simulation. Results show that our method achieves
significantly higher computational efficiency (over 10 times
faster) and more complete coverage with shorter paths. To
further validate FC-Planner, we conduct real-world cov-
erage tests in a challenging scene. Both the simulation
and real-world experiments demonstrate the superior system
simplicity and performance of our method compared to state-
of-the-art ones. The contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) An SSD that efficiently extracts the skeleton of complex
3D scenes and guides the coverage planning.
2) An efficient and specialized viewpoint sampling guided
by the skeleton, and a gravitation-like model that efficiently
screens out the minimal set of informative viewpoints.
3) A hierarchical coverage planner, which divides the
entire planning problem into parallelizable sub-problems
utilizing SSD. Along with the carefully designed global and
local planning modules, it ensures high path quality and
computational efficiency.
4) Extensive experiments validate the proposed method.
The source code of our implementation will be made public.
II. RELATED WORK
The coverage path planning problem (CPP) in 3D scenes
has been an active research topic for UAVs with a wide range
of practical applications. Existing methods typically adopt a
sampling-based framework to solve such CPP in two steps,
namely viewpoint generation and path planning.
Viewpoint Generation: It refers to the process of obtaining
a set of viewpoints to fulfill the coverage need of a target
scene. Existing methods required pre-processing the scene to
identify free space, from which safe and valid viewpoints are
then sampled. Some of these methods [1, 5]–[8, 10] utilized
triangles of the mesh to sample viewpoints. Alternatively,
other works [2, 9, 14] chose the form of point clouds. Our
approach falls into the latter category. However, both types
often sampled a large number of viewpoint candidates and
then iteratively selected a subset of viewpoints to achieve
complete coverage. This strategy resulted in vast time con-
sumption for selection and made it challenging to find the
fewest viewpoints needed.
In contrast, our method avoids pre-processing by utilizing
the skeleton to determine free space and then samples
viewpoints around the scene. To efficiently find a minimal
set of viewpoints for full coverage, we develop an efficient
strategy that iteratively updates the poses of viewpoints using
a gravitation-like model without time-consuming selection.
Path Planning: The objective of this step is to plan the
shortest collision-free path while comprehensively covering
the scene. Previous approaches [1, 5]–[10] formulated this
problem as some concrete forms of the COP, e.g., Traveling
Salesman Problem (TSP) [15], Submodular Orienteering
Problem (SOP) [16], etc. As such problems are known to
be NP-hard, the computation time increases drastically with
the complexity of the scene. To address this issue, HCPP
[2] proposed an approach that divides the scene using an
Octree. Each leaf in the Octree contains a maximum of N
viewpoints, defining a subspace. Then, the planning problem
is transformed into solving local TSPs for each subspace.
However, having viewpoints within a single subspace does
not guarantee complete coverage of that subspace. Additional
viewpoints from other subspaces may be required to achieve
full coverage. Thus, the covered area for each subspace
cannot be pre-allocated, and the covered goals for the next
subspace can only be updated once the planning for the
previous subspace is completed. This poses a challenge in
achieving parallel planning for different subspaces.
Instead, our SSD decomposes the scene into several sim-
ple subspaces guided by the skeleton. This ensures that
viewpoints within each subspace avoid mismatches with
this subspace. As a result, parallel path generation for each
subspace becomes possible, leading to significant savings in
computation time.
III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The proposed framework takes the point cloud of the
target scene as input, which is widely adopted in various
applications. As shown in Fig.2, it consists of SSD (Sect.IV),
efficient viewpoint generation (Sect.V), and hierarchical cov-
erage planner (Sect.VI). SSD extracts the skeleton of the
point cloud and decomposes the cloud into subspaces with
simple geometry (Sect.IV). Guided by the skeleton, we
determine the internal space and viewpoint sampling rays
to sample safe initial viewpoints without pre-processing.
Our method then minimizes the number of viewpoints by
updating their poses using a gravitation-like model (Sect.V).

Afterwards, the hierarchical planner finds a global visiting
sequence of subspaces, optimizes local paths for each sub-
space in parallel, refines the junction parts between local
paths, and generates a trajectory to realize complete coverage
(Sect.IV).
IV. SKELETON-BASED SPACE DECOMPOSITION
In this section, we present our skeleton-based space de-
composition in three steps. 1) Compute the skeleton com-
posed of generalized rotational symmetry axis (ROSA) points
[17] given the point cloud of the target scene (Sect.IV-A). 2)
Decompose the skeleton into several simple shapes, termed
branches (Sect.IV-B). 3) Allocate the point cloud into each
branch, forming the corresponding subspace (Sect.IV-C).
A. Skeleton Extraction
To begin, we obtain the oriented point cloud PO from
the input point cloud by normal estimation [18]. Inspired
by [17], we represent the skeleton using a set of ROSA
points, each of which consists of a position and an ori-
entation denoted as r=(x, v). To accelerate the calculation
process, we downsample PO as PD and compute its ROSA
point rp=(xp, vp) of each point p ∈PD. For each p, its
corresponding ROSA point operates on the p’s neighborhood
Np within the plane constructed by vp and p. ROSA point
exhibits high rotational symmetry about Np. This property
necessitates that the orientation vp minimizes the variance
of the angles between vp and normals in Np, while the
position xp minimizes the sum of squared distances to the
line extensions of normals in Np. Firstly, given an initial
orientation v0
p, we iteratively optimize vp by solving the
below quadratic programming problem:
vi+1
p
=
arg min
vp∈R3,||vp||2=1
vi
p
TΣi
pvi
p,
(1)
where vi
p denotes the orientation at the i-th iteration. Σi
p
is the covariance matrix of all point normals in p’s neigh-
borhood N i
p. After finding orientation of ROSA point, we
calculate xp using the following procedure:
arg min
xp∈R3
X
pk∈Np
||(xp −pk) × n(pk)||2
2,
(2)
where n(pk) denotes point normal of pk ∈Np. Lastly, we
apply 1D moving least square [19] on all ROSA points to
generate the skeleton. The skeleton is stored in an undirected
graph G = (Vs, Es), where vertices Vs contain all ROSA
points while edges Es represent their connections.
B. Skeleton Decomposition
As outlined in Algo.1, we decompose the extracted skele-
ton into several branches, each of which comprises a set of
edges in G. These branches are all contained in the set of
branches denoted by B. In line 2, we identify joints J on
G, which are defined as vertices with their degree greater
than two. Due to simple geometry requirements, a branch
typically starts with a joint and ends with a joint or a leaf
vertex (degree equals one). To obtain branches satisfying
Algorithm 1: Skeleton Decomposition
Input: Skeleton graph G = (Vs, Es), Angle variance maximum δ
Output: Branches set B
1 Define: Joints set J , Branch Tb, Current vertex vc, Next vertex vn
2 J ←FindJoint(Vs);
3 for vj ∈J do
4
for vadj ∈vj.AdjacentVertices do
5
Tb.clear(); vc = vj, vn = vadj;
6
Tb.AddEdge(vcvn);
7
while deg(vn) = 2 do
8
Q ←vn.AdjacentVertices.remove(vc);
9
vc = vn, vn = Q.first();
10
Tb.AddEdge(vcvn);
11
end
12
B.Add(Tb);
13
end
14 end
15 Define: Temporary branches set BT , Reference direction angle σ
16 for b ∈B do
17
Tb.clear(); Tb.AddEdge(b[0]); σ = CalculateAngle(b[0]);
18
for i ∈[1, b.size()) do
19
if ||CalculateAngle(b[i]) −σ|| < δ then
20
Tb.AddEdge(b[i]);
21
else
22
BT .Add(Tb); Tb.clear();
23
Tb.AddEdge(b[i]); σ = CalculateAngle(b[i]);
24
end
25
end
26 end
27 B = BT .
the above needs, we develop a depth-first search (DFS)-like
procedure [20] in lines 3-14. Further, to ensure that each
branch is as simple and easy to cover as possible, we require
that edges within one branch should have similar directions.
Thus, in lines 16-26 we decompose the branches with large
direction changes into simpler ones.
C. Space Allocation
Given the decomposed skeleton, we aim to allocate the
points in PO into multiple subspaces, each of which cor-
responds to a branch in B. We discretize edges in those
branches into several oriented points, whose orientation is
the direction of the edge it is on. The planes determined
by these oriented points are denoted as Γ. Then, for each
plane, we query points within this plane from PO. If one
point p ∈PO is located on more than one plane, p will
be allocated to the plane whose oriented point is nearest to
it. After that, the points queried by planes (named allocated
points A) from the same branch are included in a subspace.
All subspaces are contained in S = {s1, ..., sN}.
V. SKELETON-GUIDED VIEWPOINT GENERATION
This section presents the efficient generation of viewpoints
for full coverage. The skeleton allows for the identification of
internal space that ensures the safety of viewpoints without
pre-processing. Additionally, the skeleton spawns a set of
viewpoint sampling rays, guiding the production of view-
points (Sect.V-A). To efficiently find a minimal set of view-
points, we propose a gravitation-like model that iteratively
adjusts the pose of viewpoints and removes redundant ones,
screening out a more representative subset (Sect.V-C). This
process is further accelerated by bidirectional ray casting
(BiRC) that allows for faster visibility checks (Sect.V-B).

Fig. 3.
(a) Generation of internal space and viewpoint sampling rays
(Sect.V-A). (b) Gravitation-like model used to update the pose of query
viewpoint (Sect.V-C).
A. Internal Space and Viewpoint Sampling Ray
The internal space is represented using a volumetric map
whose all voxels are initialized as free. The voxels that
contain PO are updated as occupied. For each plane γi ∈Γ
(Sect.IV-C), we perform ray casting from its oriented point
oi (located on the skeleton) to each of its allocated points
Ai. Fig.3(a) shows that voxels along the rays before crossing
the occupied ones are labeled as internal. The rays continue
to extend into the free space, and we define the parts of
these rays starting from the occupied voxels as viewpoint
sampling rays. Safe and informative viewpoints are sampled
along them, reducing the number of redundantly sampled
viewpoints. These specialized viewpoints also provide better
coverage since the skeleton guides them all pointing towards
the surface. Moreover, the viewpoint sampling rays that cast
from oi belong to the subspace that corresponds to oi.
B. Bidirectional Ray Casting
Ray casting is widely used for the visibility check of
viewpoints. However, this approach traverses voxels unidi-
rectionally, commencing from one end of the ray. It may
not efficiently identify occlusions when an occupied voxel is
located near the other end of the ray. To address this issue, we
implement bidirectional ray casting (BiRC), wherein voxels
are traversed from both ends toward the midpoint of the ray.
This approach stops earlier and eliminates redundant checks
in the face of the aforementioned situation.
C. Iterative Updates of Viewpoint Pose
Our method employs 5-DoF viewpoints, denoted as vp =
[p, θ, ϕ, id], where p is the 3D position of the sensor, θ, ϕ
respectively represent pitch and yaw angles. The parameter
id is the subspace to which the viewpoint belongs. The start
and direction of viewpoint sampling ray rvs is respectively
described as sr = [xsr, ysr, zsr] and dr = [nxdr, nydr, nzdr].
We sample one viewpoint along each rvs at distance D
away, the id of which refers to the subspace rvs belongs
to. The position, pitch, and yaw of the sampled viewpoint
are determined as follows:
p = sr + D ∗dr, θ = arcsin(−nzdr/||dr||2),
ϕ = arctan(−nydr/ −nxdr).
(3)
These sampled viewpoints are named as initial viewpoints
VPini. The first step is to determine voxels covered by
each viewpoint in VPini using the proposed BiRC. Next,
to reduce the number of viewpoints, we assign each voxel to
the viewpoint that covers the most voxels if it is observed by
more than two viewpoints. We then remove the viewpoints
that are not assigned any voxels from VPini. Afterwards,
Algorithm 2: Local Path Refinement
Input: Coverage path PC, branches set B, junction radius rjc
Output: Refined coverage path PR
1 Z ←FindJunctionVertex(B); TC ←BuildKdTree(PC);
2 for z ∈Z do
3
Vjc ←TC.RadiusSearch(z, rjc);
4
for i ∈[1, K] do
5
v1 ←RandomPick(Vjc); Vtemp ←Vjc.remove(v1);
6
v2 ←RandomNeighbor(v1);
7
if v2 == v1.Suc then
8
Vtemp ←Vtemp.remove(v2 & v2.Suc);
9
else
10
Vtemp ←Vtemp.remove(v2 & v2.Pred);
11
end
12
v3 ←RandomPick(Vtemp);
13
PR ←Make2Opt(v1, v2, v3);
14
end
15 end
we construct a kd tree [21] Tini for VPini and define a
binary state (active or dormant) for each viewpoint, initially
setting all viewpoints as active. To ensure that each viewpoint
covers as many voxels as possible, we merge the viewpoints
with fewer voxels into the viewpoints with more voxels
using a gravitation-like model. Specifically, commencing
with the viewpoint that covers the maximum number of
voxels and proceeding to the one that covers the minimum,
each viewpoint (denoted as vpq) queries its neighborhood
VPq from Tini using a radius search. The radius rq is
determined by maximal visible distance dv and the Field
of View (FoV) [fh, fw]:
rq = dv ∗tan(min(fh, fw)/2).
(4)
Fig.3(b) illustrates how we update the pose of the query
viewpoint vpq using all active viewpoints VPa in VPq
through a gravitation-like model:
pq = pq +
X
vpa∈VPa
ca
cq
(pa −pq), s.t. ca < cq,
(5)
where cq and ca denote the number of voxels covered by
vpq and each viewpoint in VPa, respectively. The updated
position of vpq is represented as pq. Similarly, we obtain
the updated pitch θq and yaw ϕq. They are further adjusted
to distribute voxels covered by vpq around the center of
FoV. The subspace to which vpq belongs is the same as
that of the nearest viewpoint to vpq in VPini. Next, we
set the state of the viewpoints used to update vpq in VPa
as dormant. After that, we identify uncovered voxels by
performing the first step for all active viewpoints and then
sample new viewpoints to cover them, denoted as VPunc.
Lastly, we repeat the above steps for VPunc achieving
complete coverage. After such iterative updates for the poses
of viewpoints, all remaining active viewpoints are assigned
to each subspace in S according to their id, with each subset
of viewpoints represented as V = {VP1, ..., VPN}.
VI. HIERARCHICAL COVERAGE PLANNING
Given the above viewpoints, this stage endeavors to find
the shortest collision-free path traversing them. Supported
by SSD, we decompose large planning problem into several
independent and parallelizable sub-problems in five steps.

Fig. 4.
Comparisons on coverage situation and generated path of the
proposed method, SIP [1], and HCPP [2] in three complex scenarios.
Global Sequence Planning. It seeks to solve an optimal
tour visiting all subspaces starting from UAV’s current pose,
which is defined as an Asymmetric Traveling Salesman
Problem (ATSP) [22]. We first calculate the centroid of
viewpoints in each subspace and then construct a Euclidean
distance matrix MG, between these centroids and UAV’s
current pose. Lin-Kernighan-Helsgaun (LKH) solver [23]
takes MG as input to obtain global sequence [g1, ..., gN].
Local Boundary Selection. We expect to select suitable
start and end viewpoints for each subspace, ensuring that
the results of local planning are compatible with the global
sequence. According to global sequence, we sort all centroids
as SeqC = [k0, ..., kN], where k0 is UAV’s current pose and
others are sorted centroids. Based on SeqC, the start vpgi
start
and end vpgi
end of i-th visited subspace are obtained as:
vpgi
start = arg min
vpgi∈VPgi
||pgi −ki−1||2
2 + ||pgi −ki||2
2,
vpgi
end = arg min
vpgi∈VPgi
||pgi −ki||2
2 + ||pgi −ki+1||2
2.
(6)
In particular, the last visited subspace will not have an end
viewpoint since there is no subsequent subspace.
Parallel Local Path Planning. Once determining boundary
viewpoints, we can individually plan local paths for each
subspace. We formulate this problem as a variant of TSP that
adds a constraint of given start and end. Suppose a subspace
has R viewpoints, cost matrix ML for this TSP follows:
ML(i, j) =





0,
i == j or j = 0
+∞,
i = R −1 and j ∈{1, ..., R −2}
cvpi,vpj,
others
,
cvpi,vpj = max(max(L(pi, pj)
vmax
, Ang(θi, θj)
ωmax
), Ang(ϕi, ϕj)
ωmax
),
Ang(a1, a2) = min(|a1 −a2|, 2π −|a1 −a2|),
(7)
where L(·) is the path length between vi and vj searched
by A∗algorithm to warrant collision-free path, vmax and
ωmax are the limits of velocity and angular rate of pitch
and yaw. For the last visited subspace, all +∞entries in
ML are set as cvpi,vpj. For each VPi ∈V, we use multi-
thread programming to parallelly produce local path that
covers its corresponding subspace. Let there be a total of
m ∈R+ viewpoints and the maximal number of viewpoints
in all sub-problems is e ∈R+, m ≫e. Since the time
complexity of solving a TSP using the LKH solver is O(n2.2)
[24], solving for the TSP of all viewpoints without problem
TABLE I
COVERAGE PLANNING COMPARISONS IN THREE SCENARIOS.
Scenario Method
Pre-process
Comp.
Time (ms)
Viewpoint
Number
Path
Length (m)
Exec.
Time (s)
Coverage
Rate (%)
Pipe
SIP [1]
✓
235012.1
3078
2754.1
3938.8
69.2
HCPP [2]
✓
16934.2
446
1874.3
1670.9
87.3
Ours
✘
1614.8
210
1440.4
1033.4
97.5
Christ the
Redeemer
SIP [1]
✓
62110.9
787
700.5
1104.8
85.9
HCPP [2]
✓
5485.7
228
635.0
642.3
97.4
Ours
✘
506.7
111
530.4
386.9
99.7
Marina
Bay Sands
SIP [1]
✓
131454.8
1770
1635.5
2789.6
68.5
HCPP [2]
✓
12639.4
369
1698.9
1613.9
89.3
Ours
✘
954.3
185
1396.2
1178.5
94.0
decomposition takes O(m2.2) time. Thanks to our parallel
planning, the time complexity of solving for all sub-problems
is reduced to O(e2.2). Hence, our method effectively lowers
the time complexity and improves computational efficiency.
We combine all local paths in the order of global sequence
to obtain the entire coverage path PC.
Local Path Refinement. Since the coverage path in the
previous step is optimized within each subspace, it cannot
guarantee global optimality thus it may produce unnecessary
detours. We have observed that these detours typically occur
near the junctions between local paths. Thus, we propose
a local refinement strategy to further improve the entire
coverage path on junctions, as depicted in Algo.2. A junction
vertex is defined as a vertex where two branches intersect in
line 1. Lines 2-16 show the iterative refinement procedure
using a local search in two steps, which continues K itera-
tions. It first chooses the parts from the whole coverage path
that are near the junctions. Then, each iteration randomly
selects three viewpoints from these parts and swaps them
using 2-opt [25] if this swap can shorten the coverage path.
Collision-free Trajectory Optimization. It aims to convert
refined coverage path PR = {v0
R, ..., vM
R } to a smooth,
dynamically feasible, safe, and minimum-time trajectory
passing through all viewpoints. Specifically, we divide PR
into M trajectory pieces and then generate 3D Safe Flight
Corridors (SFCs), where each convex flight corridor is
assigned with a consecutive set of trajectory pieces. For
position trajectory, SFCs are used to ensure safety:
tpi(t) ∈CP(i), ∀t ∈[0, Ti], ∀1 ≤i ≤M,
(8)
where tpi is the i-th trajectory piece with its duration Ti and
CP(i) denotes the assigned convex flight corridor for tpi in
SFCs. To avoid visual blur caused by aggressive flight as well
as ensuring dynamic feasibility, the velocity, acceleration and
jerk limits are also considered:
||
˙
tpi(t)||2
2 ≤v2
max, ∀t ∈[0, Ti], ∀1 ≤i ≤M,
||
¨
tpi(t)||2
2 ≤a2
max, ∀t ∈[0, Ti], ∀1 ≤i ≤M,
||
...
tpi(t)||2
2 ≤j2
max, ∀t ∈[0, Ti], ∀1 ≤i ≤M,
s.t. tpi(0) = pi−1
R , tpi(Ti) = pi
R,
(9)
where vmax, amax, and jmax are dynamic limits. We also
generate trajectories for pitch and yaw angles, where the
maximum angular velocity is limited similarly to Eq.9.

Fig. 5.
Comparisons of results before and after using local path refinement.
We utilize MINCO [26] to optimize the time allocation of
coverage trajectory while satisfying the above constraints.
VII. EXPERIMENTS
A. Implementation Details
During the skeleton extraction step, we normalize the input
point cloud within a unit sphere, which enhances its robust-
ness to variations in scene scale We set δ = 45◦in Algo.1,
the number of iterations in local path refinement K = 10000
since each iteration only consumes around 0.01ms. In all
experiments, we choose a 2-axis gimbal camera as the sensor
equipped with the UAV. A geometric controller [27] is used
for tracking control of (p, θ, ϕ) trajectory. All modules run
on an Intel Core i9-13900K CPU.
B. Benchmark Comparisons and Analysis
To validate our proposed framework, we benchmark it
in simulation including three large and complex scenes,
Pipe (73×66×41 m3), Christ the Redeemer (10×36×38
m3), and Marina Bay Sands (100×25×49 m3). Two state-
of-the-art methods are compared: SIP [1] and HCPP [2].
There is no open source code for HCPP [2], so we use our
implementation. In simulations, the pitch angle of gimbal
is limited within [−90◦, 70◦] with camera FoV [75◦, 55◦].
We set dynamic limits as vmax = 2.0 m/s, ωmax = 1.0
rad/s, amax = 1.0 m/s2, and jmax = 0.5 m/s3 for all
approaches. The average comparison results are reported in
Table.I, where Exec. Time means trajectory execution time.
We also visualize the comparisons in Fig.4.
TABLE II
ABLATION STUDY ON THE PROPOSED PLANNING MODULES.
Pipe
Christ the Redeemer
Marina Bay Sands
NR
Ours
GO
NR
Ours
GO
NR
Ours
GO
Comp. Time (ms) 1461.5 1614.8 7126.7 397.2 506.7 899.5 843.2
954.3 4901.7
Path Length (m)
1480.1 1440.4 1381.9 581.2 530.4 493.4 1561.9 1396.2 1164.8
From the evaluation, our method significantly outperforms
others in computation efficiency, coverage completeness, and
path quality. Our framework achieves maximal coverage with
minimal viewpoints due to the proposed skeleton-guided
viewpoint generation. Thanks to our effective SSD and
parallel planning, our approach runs over 10x faster than
existing methods. For path quality, we generate a shorter
coverage path and trajectory realizing less execution time.
Additionally, such advantages become more pronounced as
the complexity and scale of the scene increase.
TABLE III
COMPUTATION TIME OF EACH MODULE.
SSD
Subspaces Viewpoint
Generation
Hierarchical Planning
Safe Path Search Planning
Pipe
∼80ms
4
∼160ms
∼1000ms
∼200ms
Christ the Redeemer ∼35ms
4
∼80ms
∼210ms
∼180ms
Marina Bay Sands
∼300ms
10
∼150ms
∼300ms
∼200ms
Fig. 6.
(a) The quadrotor with gimbal camera platform used for real-world
coverage test. (b) The 3D reconstruction results after aerial coverage.
We perform ablation studies to demonstrate the effective-
ness of local path refinement and hierarchical planning. We
denote our framework without local refinement as NR, while
GO replaces hierarchical planning with global optimization
of the path for all viewpoints together. Table.II shows
the contributions of local path refinement and hierarchical
planning to path quality and computation efficiency. Our
method shortens the path with minimal additional compu-
tation compared to NR. Fig.5 presents the effectiveness of
local refinement. Compared to GO, our approach markedly
reduces computation time with minimal loss in path quality.
Moreover, we provide the runtime of each module and space
decomposition details in Table.III. Table.III also provides
runtime of each module and space decomposition details.
Moreover, detailed performance information for each module
can be found on our project page.
C. Real-world Test
To further verify the proposed framework, we conduct a
real-world coverage test in a challenging scene as shown
in Fig.1(a), the size of which is 10×5×2.5 m3. For this
test, we design a customized quadrotor as presented in
Fig.6(a). The gimbal rotates between [−90◦, 20◦] and the
camera FoV is [60◦, 80◦]. The dynamic limits are set as
vmax = 0.7 m/s, ωmax = 1.0 rad/s, amax = 0.5 m/s2,
and jmax = 0.5 m/s3. We first collect the point cloud of
the scene using Lidar. Then, our framework produces the
coverage trajectory as shown in Fig.1(b), where our method
reasonably decomposes the scene into five subspaces for
parallel planning. Afterwards, the quadrotor captures images
during executing the trajectory. Lastly, we use these images
to reconstruct the scene and the results shown in Fig.6(b)
demonstrate our method indeed achieves complete coverage.
More details about this test can be found in our video.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we present a skeleton-guided planning frame-
work designed specifically for fast coverage of large and
complex 3D scenes. The proposed SSD efficiently extracts
the scene’s skeleton, enabling reasonable decomposition of
the scene into simple subspaces and guiding efficient gener-
ation of specialized and informative viewpoints without pre-
processing. Based on SSD, the hierarchical coverage planner
divides the entire planning problem into parallelizable sub-
problems, combining the devised global planning and local
refinement approaches to efficiently produce the high-quality
coverage path. The extensive experiments demonstrate the
efficiency and superiority of our framework. In the future,
we plan to extend our framework to multi-UAV system for
cooperative coverage in larger and unknown 3D scenes.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Bircher, K. Alexis, M. Burri, P. Oettershagen, S. Omari, T. Mantel,
and R. Siegwart, “Structural inspection path planning via iterative
viewpoint resampling with application to aerial robotics,” in 2015
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 6423–6430.
[2] C. Cao, J. Zhang, M. Travers, and H. Choset, “Hierarchical coverage
path planning in complex 3d environments,” in 2020 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2020,
pp. 3206–3212.
[3] C. Feng, H. Li, F. Gao, B. Zhou, and S. Shen, “Predrecon: A
prediction-boosted planning framework for fast and high-quality au-
tonomous aerial reconstruction,” in 2023 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2023, pp. 1207–1213.
[4] E. Galceran and M. Carreras, “A survey on coverage path planning
for robotics,” Robotics and Autonomous systems, vol. 61, no. 12, pp.
1258–1276, 2013.
[5] W. Jing, J. Polden, W. Lin, and K. Shimada, “Sampling-based view
planning for 3d visual coverage task with unmanned aerial vehicle,”
in 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1808–1815.
[6] R. Almadhoun, T. Taha, D. Gan, J. Dias, Y. Zweiri, and L. Seneviratne,
“Coverage path planning with adaptive viewpoint sampling to con-
struct 3d models of complex structures for the purpose of inspection,”
in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 7047–7054.
[7] W. Jing, D. Deng, Z. Xiao, Y. Liu, and K. Shimada, “Coverage path
planning using path primitive sampling and primitive coverage graph
for visual inspection,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1472–1479.
[8] H. W. Tong, B. Li, H. Huang, and C.-y. Wen, “Uav path planning for
complete structural inspection using mixed viewpoint generation,” in
2022 17th International Conference on Control, Automation, Robotics
and Vision (ICARCV).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 727–732.
[9] X. Huang, Y. Liu, L. Huang, S. Stikbakke, and E. Onstein, “Bim-
supported drone path planning for building exterior surface inspec-
tion,” Computers in Industry, vol. 153, p. 104019, 2023.
[10] M. Roberts, D. Dey, A. Truong, S. Sinha, S. Shah, A. Kapoor, P. Han-
rahan, and N. Joshi, “Submodular trajectory optimization for aerial 3d
scanning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 5324–5333.
[11] “Blender,” https://www.blender.org/.
[12] “Cloudcompare,” https://www.cloudcompare.org/.
[13] C. H. Papadimitriou and K. Steiglitz, Combinatorial optimization:
algorithms and complexity.
Courier Corporation, 1998.
[14] R. M. Claro, M. I. Pereira, F. S. Neves, and A. M. Pinto, “Energy
efficient path planning for 3d aerial inspections,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 32 152–32 166, 2023.
[15] G. Dantzig, R. Fulkerson, and S. Johnson, “Solution of a large-
scale traveling-salesman problem,” Journal of the operations research
society of America, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 393–410, 1954.
[16] C. Chekuri and M. Pal, “A recursive greedy algorithm for walks in
directed graphs,” in 46th annual IEEE symposium on foundations of
computer science (FOCS’05).
IEEE, 2005, pp. 245–253.
[17] A. Tagliasacchi, H. Zhang, and D. Cohen-Or, “Curve skeleton extrac-
tion from incomplete point cloud,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2009 papers,
2009, pp. 1–9.
[18] R. B. Rusu and S. Cousins, “3d is here: Point cloud library (pcl),”
in 2011 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[19] I.-K. Lee, “Curve reconstruction from unorganized points,” Computer
aided geometric design, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 161–177, 2000.
[20] R. Tarjan, “Depth-first search and linear graph algorithms,” SIAM
journal on computing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 146–160, 1972.
[21] K. Zhou, Q. Hou, R. Wang, and B. Guo, “Real-time kd-tree construc-
tion on graphics hardware,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1–11, 2008.
[22] Z. Meng, H. Qin, Z. Chen, X. Chen, H. Sun, F. Lin, and M. H. Ang, “A
two-stage optimized next-view planning framework for 3-d unknown
environment exploration, and structural reconstruction,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1680–1687, 2017.
[23] K. Helsgaun, “An effective implementation of the lin–kernighan trav-
eling salesman heuristic,” European journal of operational research,
vol. 126, no. 1, pp. 106–130, 2000.
[24] C. H. Papadimitriou, “The complexity of the lin–kernighan heuristic
for the traveling salesman problem,” SIAM Journal on Computing,
vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 450–465, 1992.
[25] S. M. McGovern and S. M. Gupta, “2-opt heuristic for the disassembly
line balancing problem,” in Environmentally conscious manufacturing
iii, vol. 5262.
SPIE, 2004, pp. 71–84.
[26] Z. Wang, X. Zhou, C. Xu, and F. Gao, “Geometrically constrained tra-
jectory optimization for multicopters,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 3259–3278, 2022.
[27] T. Lee, M. Leoky, and N. H. McClamroch, “Geometric tracking control
of a quadrotor uav on se (3),” in Proc. of the IEEE Control and
Decision Conf. (CDC), Atlanta, GA, Dec. 2010, pp. 5420–5425.
