Submodular Trajectory Optimization for Aerial 3D Scanning
Mike Roberts1,2
Debadeepta Dey2
Anh Truong3
Sudipta Sinha2
Shital Shah2
Ashish Kapoor2
Pat Hanrahan1
Neel Joshi2
1Stanford University
2Microsoft Research
3Adobe Research
Abstract
Drones equipped with cameras are emerging as a pow-
erful tool for large-scale aerial 3D scanning, but existing
automatic ﬂight planners do not exploit all available in-
formation about the scene, and can therefore produce in-
accurate and incomplete 3D models. We present an auto-
matic method to generate drone trajectories, such that the
imagery acquired during the ﬂight will later produce a high-
ﬁdelity 3D model. Our method uses a coarse estimate of the
scene geometry to plan camera trajectories that: (1) cover
the scene as thoroughly as possible; (2) encourage obser-
vations of scene geometry from a diverse set of viewing an-
gles; (3) avoid obstacles; and (4) respect a user-speciﬁed
ﬂight time budget. Our method relies on a mathematical
model of scene coverage that exhibits an intuitive diminish-
ing returns property known as submodularity. We leverage
this property extensively to design a trajectory planning al-
gorithm that reasons globally about the non-additive cov-
erage reward obtained across a trajectory, jointly with the
cost of traveling between views. We evaluate our method by
using it to scan three large outdoor scenes, and we perform
a quantitative evaluation using a photorealistic video game
simulator.
1. Introduction
Small consumer drones equipped with high-resolution
cameras are emerging as a powerful tool for large-scale
aerial 3D scanning. In order to obtain high-quality 3D re-
constructions, a drone must capture images that densely
cover the scene. Additionally, 3D reconstruction methods
typically require surfaces to be viewed from multiple view-
points, at an appropriate distance, and with sufﬁcient an-
gular separation (i.e., baseline) between views.
Existing
autonomous ﬂight planners do not always satisfy these re-
quirements, which can be difﬁcult to reason about, even for
a skilled human pilot manually controlling a drone. Further-
more, the limited battery life of consumer drones provides
only 10–15 minutes of ﬂight time, making it even more
challenging to obtain high-quality 3D reconstructions.
Figure 1. 3D reconstruction results obtained using our algorithm
for generating aerial 3D scanning trajectories, as compared to an
overhead trajectory. Top row: Google Earth visualizations of the
trajectories. Middle and bottom rows: results obtained by ﬂying
a drone along each trajectory, capturing images, and feeding the
images to multi-view stereo software. Our trajectories lead to no-
ticeably more detailed 3D reconstructions than overhead trajecto-
ries. In all our experiments, we control for the ﬂight time, battery
consumption, number of images, and quality settings used in the
3D reconstruction.
In lieu of manual piloting, commercial ﬂight planning
tools generate conservative trajectories (e.g., a lawnmower
or orbit pattern at a safe height above the scene) that at-
tempt to cover the scene while respecting ﬂight time bud-
1
arXiv:1705.00703v3  [cs.CV]  4 Aug 2017

gets [1, 46]. However, because these trajectories are gen-
erated with no awareness of the scene geometry, they tend
to over-sample some regions (e.g., rooftops), while under-
sampling others (e.g., facades, overhangs, and ﬁne details),
and therefore sacriﬁce reconstruction quality.
We propose a method to automate aerial 3D scanning, by
planning good camera trajectories for reconstructing large
3D scenes (see Figure 1). Our method relies on a math-
ematical model that evaluates the usefulness of a camera
trajectory for the purpose of 3D scanning. Given a coarse
estimate of the scene geometry as input, our model quanti-
ﬁes how well a trajectory covers the scene, and also quan-
tiﬁes the diversity and appropriateness of views along the
trajectory. Using this model for scene coverage, our method
generates trajectories that maximize coverage, subject to a
travel budget. We bootstrap our method using coarse scene
geometry, which we obtain using the imagery acquired from
a short initial ﬂight over the scene.
We formulate our trajectory planning task as a reward-
collecting graph optimization problem known as orienteer-
ing, that combines aspects of the traveling salesman and
knapsack problems, and is known to be NP-hard [24, 57].
However, unlike the additive rewards in the standard orien-
teering problem, our rewards are non-additive, and globally
coupled through our coverage model. We make the obser-
vation that our coverage model exhibits an intuitive dimin-
ishing returns property known as submodularity [37], and
therefore we must solve a submodular orienteering prob-
lem. Although submodular orienteering is strictly harder
than additive orienteering, it exhibits useful structure that
can be exploited. We propose a novel transformation of our
submodular orienteering problem into an additive orienteer-
ing problem, and we solve the additive problem as an inte-
ger linear program. We leverage submodularity extensively
throughout the derivation of our method, to obtain approx-
imate solutions with strong theoretical guarantees, and dra-
matically reduce computation times.
We demonstrate the utility of our method by using it to
scan three large outdoor scenes: a barn, an ofﬁce building,
and an industrial site. We also quantitatively evaluate our al-
gorithm in a photorealistic video game simulator. In all our
experiments, we obtain noticeably higher-quality 3D recon-
structions than strong baseline methods.
2. Related Work
Aerial 3D Scanning and Mapping
High-quality 3D re-
constructions of very large scenes can be obtained using of-
ﬂine multi-view stereo algorithms [21] to process images
acquired by drones [45]. Real-time mapping algorithms for
drones have also been proposed, that take as input either
RGBD [28, 39, 43, 54] or RGB [62] images, and produce as
output a 3D reconstruction of the scene. These methods are
solving a reconstruction problem, and do not, themselves,
generate drone trajectories. Several commercially available
ﬂight planning tools have been developed to assist with 3D
scanning [1, 46]. However, these tools only generate con-
servative lawnmower and orbit trajectories above the scene.
In contrast, our algorithm generates trajectories that cover
the scene as thoroughly as possible, ultimately leading to
higher-quality 3D reconstructions.
Generating trajectories that explore an unknown environ-
ment, while building a map of it, is a classical problem
in robotics [56].
Exploration algorithms have been pro-
posed for drones based on local search heuristics [58], iden-
tifying the frontiers between known and unknown parts of
the scene [27, 51], maximizing newly visible parts of the
scene [5], maximizing information gain [6, 7], and imita-
tion learning [11]. A closely related problem in robotics
is generating trajectories that cover a known environment
[22]. Several coverage path planning algorithms have been
proposed for drones [3, 4, 26, 29]. In an especially simi-
lar spirit to our work, Heng et al. propose to reconstruct an
unknown environment by executing alternating exploration
and coverage trajectories [26]. However, existing strategies
for exploration and coverage do not explicitly account for
the domain-speciﬁc requirements of multi-view stereo al-
gorithms (e.g., observing the scene geometry from a diverse
set of viewing angles). Moreover, existing exploration and
coverage strategies have not been shown to produce visually
pleasing multi-view stereo reconstructions, and are gener-
ally not evaluated on multi-view stereo reconstruction tasks.
In contrast, our trajectories cover the scene in a way that ex-
plicitly accounts for the requirements of multi-view stereo
algorithms, and we evaluate the multi-view stereo recon-
struction performance of our algorithm directly.
Several path planning algorithms have been proposed
for drones, that explicitly attempt to maximize multi-view
stereo reconstruction performance [16, 30, 44, 49]. These
algorithms are similar in spirit to ours, but adopt a two phase
strategy for generating trajectories. In the ﬁrst phase, these
algorithms select a sequence of next-best-views to visit, ig-
noring travel costs. In the second phase, they ﬁnd an efﬁ-
cient path that connects the previously selected views. In
contrast, our algorithm reasons about these two problems –
selecting good views and routing between them – jointly
in a uniﬁed global optimization problem, enabling us to
generate more rewarding trajectories, and ultimately higher-
quality 3D reconstructions.
View Selection and Path Planning
The problem of op-
timizing the placement (and motion) of sensors to improve
performance on a perception task is a classical problem in
computer vision and robotics, where it generally goes by the
name of active vision, e.g., see the comprehensive surveys
[10, 50, 55]. We discuss directly related work not included
in these surveys here. A variety of active algorithms for 3D
scanning with ground-based range scanners have been pro-
2

posed, that select a sequence of next-best-views [36], and
then ﬁnd an efﬁcient path to connect the views [19, 68]. In
a similar spirit to our work, Wang et al. propose a uniﬁed
optimization problem that selects rewarding views, while
softly penalizing travel costs [61]. We adapt these ideas
to account for the domain-speciﬁc requirements of multi-
view stereo algorithms, and we impose a hard travel budget
constraint, which is an important safety requirement when
designing drone trajectories.
Several algorithms have been proposed to select an ap-
propriate subset of views for multi-view stereo reconstruc-
tion [15, 31, 40, 41], and to optimize coverage of a scene
[23, 42]. However, these methods do not model travel costs
between views. In contrast, we impose a hard constraint on
the travel cost of the path formed by the views we select.
Submodular Path Planning
Submodularity [37] has
been considered in path planning scenarios before, ﬁrst in
the theory community [8, 9], and more recently in the ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence [52, 53, 69] and robotics [26, 29] com-
munities. The coverage path planning formulation of Heng
et al. [26] is similar to ours, in the sense that both for-
mulations use the same technique for approximating cov-
erage [32, 33]. We extend this formulation to account for
the domain-speciﬁc requirements of multi-view stereo al-
gorithms, and we evaluate the multi-view stereo reconstruc-
tion performance of our algorithm directly.
3. Technical Overview
In order to generate scanning trajectories, our algorithm
leverages a coarse estimate of the scene geometry. Initially,
we do not have any estimate of the scene geometry, so we
adopt an explore-then-exploit approach.
In the explore phase, we ﬂy our drone (i.e., we command
our drone to ﬂy autonomously) along a default trajectory
at a safe distance above the scene, acquiring a sequence of
images as we are ﬂying. We land our drone, and subse-
quently feed the acquired images to an open-source multi-
view stereo pipeline, thereby obtaining a coarse estimate of
the scene geometry, and a strictly conservative estimate of
the scene’s free space. We include a more detailed discus-
sion of our explore phase in the supplementary material.
In the exploit phase, we use this additional information
about the scene to plan a scanning trajectory that attempts
to maximize the ﬁdelity of the resulting 3D reconstruc-
tion. At the core of our planning algorithm, is a coverage
model that accounts for the domain-speciﬁc requirements
of multi-view stereo reconstruction (Section 4). Using this
model, we generate a scanning trajectory that maximizes
scene coverage, while respecting the drone’s limited ﬂight
time (Section 5). We ﬂy the drone along our scanning tra-
jectory, acquiring another sequence of images. Finally, we
land our drone again, and we feed all the images we have
(a) Evaluating coverage for three
cameras and a single surface point
c1
c2
c3
s
(b) Evaluating coverage for a camera
trajectory and multiple surface points
Figure 2.
Our coverage model for quantifying the usefulness of
camera trajectories for multi-view stereo reconstruction.
More
useful trajectories cover more of the hemisphere of viewing an-
gles around surface points. (a) An illustrative example showing
coverage of a single surface point with three cameras. Each cam-
era covers a circular disk on a hemisphere around the surface point
s, and the total solid angle covered by all the disks determines the
total usefulness of the cameras. Note that the angular separation
(i.e., baseline) between cameras c2 and c3 is small and leads to
diminishing returns in their combined usefulness. (b) The useful-
ness of a camera trajectory, integrated over multiple surface points,
is determined by summing the total covered solid angle for each
of the individual surface points. Our model naturally encourages
diverse observations of the scene geometry, and encodes the even-
tual diminishing returns of additional observations.
acquired to our multi-view stereo pipeline to obtain a de-
tailed 3D reconstruction of the scene.
4. Coverage Model for Camera Trajectories
In this section, we model the usefulness of a camera
trajectory for multi-view stereo reconstruction, in terms of
how well it covers the scene geometry.
We provide an
overview of our coverage model in Figure 2.
In reality, the most useful camera trajectory is the one
that yields the highest-quality 3D reconstruction of the
scene. However, it is not clear how we would search for
such a camera trajectory directly, without resorting to ﬂying
candidate trajectories and performing expensive 3D recon-
structions for each of them. In contrast, our coverage model
only roughly approximates the true usefulness of a camera
trajectory. However, as we will see in the following sec-
tion, our coverage model: (1) is motivated by established
best practices for multi-view stereo image acquisition; (2)
is easy to evaluate; (3) only requires a coarse estimate of
the scene geometry as input; and (4) exhibits submodular
structure, which will enable us to efﬁciently maximize it.
Best Practices for Multi-View Stereo Image Acquisition
As a rule of thumb, it is recommended to capture an im-
age every 5–15 degrees around an object, and it is generally
accepted that capturing images more densely will eventu-
ally lead to diminishing returns in the ﬁdelity of the 3D re-
construction [21]. Similarly, close-up and fronto-parallel
views can help to resolve ﬁne geometric details, because
these views increase the effective resolution of estimated
3

(a) Original problem: ﬁnd the 
closed path of camera poses 
that maximizes coverage
(b) Solve for the optimal set of 
camera orientations, ignoring 
path constraints
(d) Additive approximation to 
the coarsened problem
(e) Solve for the optimal 
closed path on the additive 
approximation
(c) Coarsened problem
Figure 3. Overview of our algorithm for generating camera trajectories that maximize coverage. (a) Our goal is to ﬁnd the optimal closed
path of camera poses through a discrete graph. (b) We begin by solving for the optimal camera orientation at every node in our graph,
ignoring path constraints. (c) In doing so, we remove the choice of camera orientation from our problem, coarsening our problem into a
more standard form. (d) The solution to the problem in (b) deﬁnes an approximation to our coarsened problem, where there is an additive
reward for visiting each node. (e) Finally, we solve for the optimal closed path on the additive approximation deﬁned in (d).
depth images, and contribute more reliable texture informa-
tion to the reconstruction [60]. We explicitly encode these
best practices for multi-view stereo image acquisition into
our coverage model.
Formal Deﬁnition
Given a candidate camera trajectory
and approximate scene geometry as a triangle mesh, our
goal is to quantify how well the trajectory covers the scene
geometry. We ﬁrst uniformly sample the camera trajectory
to generate a discrete set C, consisting of individual camera
poses c0:I. Similarly, we uniformly sample oriented surface
points s0:J from the scene geometry. For each oriented sur-
face point sj, we deﬁne an oriented hemisphere Hj around
it. For each surface point sj and camera ci, we deﬁne a
circular disk Dj
i that covers an angular region of the hemi-
sphere Hj, centered at the location where ci projects onto
Hj (see Figure 2). When the surface point sj is not visi-
ble from the camera ci, we deﬁne the disk Dj
i to have zero
radius, and we truncate the extent of each disk so that it
does not extend past the equator of Hj. We deﬁne the to-
tal covered region of the hemisphere Hj as the union of all
the disks that partially cover Hj (see Figure 2), referring to
this total covered region as Vj = SI
i=0 Dj
i . We deﬁne our
coverage model as follows,
f(C) =
J
X
j=0
Z
Vj
wj(h)dh
(1)
where the outer summation is over all hemispheres;
R
Vj dh
refers to the surface integral over the covered region Vj;
and wj(h) is a non-negative weight function that assigns
different reward values for covering different parts of Hj.
Our model can be interpreted as quantifying how well a set
of cameras covers the scene’s surface light ﬁeld [13, 63].
We include a method for efﬁciently evaluating our coverage
model in the supplementary material.
To encourage close-up views, we set the radius of Dj
i
to decay exponentially as the camera ci moves away from
the surface point sj. To encourage fronto-parallel views, we
design each function wj(h) to decay in a cosine-weighted
fashion, as the hemisphere location h moves away from the
hemisphere pole. We include our exact formulation for Dj
i
and wj(h) in the supplementary material.
Submodularity
Roughly speaking, a set function is sub-
modular if the marginal reward for adding an element to
the input set always decreases, as more elements are added
to the input set [37]. Our coverage model is submodular,
because all coverage functions with non-negative weights
are submodular [37]. Submodularity is a useful property
to identify when attempting to optimize a set function, and
is often referred to as the discrete analogue of convexity.
We will leverage submodularity extensively in the follow-
ing section, as we derive our algorithm for generating cam-
era trajectories that maximizing coverage.
5. Generating Optimal Camera Trajectories
We provide an overview of our algorithm in Figure 3.
Our approach is to formulate a reward-collecting optimiza-
tion problem on a graph. The nodes in the graph represent
camera positions, the edges represent Euclidean distances
between camera positions, and the rewards are collected by
visiting new nodes. The goal is to ﬁnd a path that collects
as much reward as possible, subject to a budget constraint
on the total path length. This general problem is known as
the orienteering problem [24, 57].
A variety of approaches have been proposed to approx-
imately solve the orienteering problem, which is NP-hard.
However, these methods are not directly applicable to our
problem, because they assume that the rewards on nodes are
additive. But the total reward we collect in our problem is
determined by our coverage model, which does not exhibit
additive structure. Indeed, the marginal reward we collect
at a node might be very large, or very small, depending on
the entire set of other nodes we visit.
The marginal reward we collect at each node also de-
pends strongly on the orientation of our camera. In other
words, our orienteering problem involves extra choices –
4

how to orient the camera at each visited node – and these
choices are globally coupled through our submodular cov-
erage function. Therefore, even existing algorithms for sub-
modular orienteering [8, 9, 26, 52, 53, 69] are not directly
applicable to our problem, because these algorithms assume
there are no extra choices to make at each visited node.
Our strategy will be to apply two successive problem
transformations. First, we leverage submodularity to solve
for the approximately optimal camera orientation at every
node in our graph, ignoring path constraints (Fig. 3b, Sec-
tion 5.1). In doing so, we remove the choice of camera
orientation from our orienteering problem, thereby coars-
ening it into a more standard form (Fig. 3c). Second, we
leverage submodularity to construct a tight additive approx-
imation of our coverage function (Fig. 3d, Section 5.2). In
doing so, we relax our coarsened submodular orienteering
problem into a standard additive orienteering problem. We
formulate this additive orienteering problem as a compact
integer linear program, and solve it approximately using a
commercially available solver (Fig. 3e, Section 5.3).
Preprocessing
We begin by constructing a discrete set of
all the possible camera poses we might include in our path.
We refer to this set as our ground set of camera poses, C.
We construct this set by uniformly sampling a user-deﬁned
bounding box that spans the scene, then uniformly sam-
pling a downward-facing unit hemisphere to produce a set
of look-at vectors that our drone camera can actuate. We
deﬁne our ground set as the Cartesian product of these posi-
tions and look-at vectors. We construct the graph for our
orienteering problem as the grid graph of all the unique
camera positions in C, pruned so that it is entirely restricted
to the known free space in the scene (see Section 3).
Our Submodular Orienteering Problem
Let P
=
(p0, v0), (p1, v1), . . . , (pq, vq) be a camera path through
our graph, represented as a sequence of camera poses taken
from our ground set. We represent each camera pose as a
position pi and a look-at vector vi. We would like to ﬁnd
the optimal path P⋆as follows,
P⋆= arg max
P
f(CP)
subject to
l(P) ≤B
p0 = pq = proot
(2)
where CP ⊆C is the set of all the unique camera poses
along the path; l(P) is the length of the path; B is a user-
deﬁned travel budget; and proot is the position where our
path must start and end. For safety reasons, we would also
like to design trajectories that consume close to, but no more
than, some ﬁxed fraction of our drone’s battery (e.g., 80%
or so). However, constraining battery consumption directly
is difﬁcult to express in our orienteering formulation, so we
model this constraint indirectly by imposing a budget con-
straint on path length. We make the observation that our
problem is intractable in its current form, because it requires
searching over an exponential number of paths through our
graph. This observation motivates the following two prob-
lem transformations.
5.1. Solving for Optimal Camera Orientations
Our goal in this subsection is to solve for the optimal
camera orientation at every node in our graph, ignoring path
constraints. We achieve this goal with the following relax-
ation of the problem in equation (2). Let CS ⊆C be a
subset of camera poses from our ground set. We would like
to ﬁnd the optimal subset of camera poses C⋆
S as follows,
C⋆
S = arg max
CS
f(CS)
subject to
|CS| = N
CS ∈M
(3)
where |CS| is the cardinality of CS; N is the total number of
unique positions in our graph; and the constraint CS ∈M
enforces mutual exclusion, where we are allowed to select
at most one camera orientation at each node in our graph. In
this relaxed problem, we are attempting to maximize cover-
age by selecting exactly one camera orientation at each node
in our graph. We can interpret such a solution as a coarsened
ground set for the problem in equation (2), thereby trans-
forming it into a standard submodular orienteering problem.
Because our coverage function is submodular, the prob-
lem in equation (3) can be solved very efﬁciently, and to
within 50% of global optimality, with a very simple greedy
algorithm [37]. Roughly speaking, the greedy algorithm se-
lects camera poses from our ground set in order of marginal
reward, taking care to respect the mutual exclusion con-
straint, until no more elements can be selected. Submodu-
larity can also be exploited to signiﬁcantly reduce the com-
putation time required by the greedy algorithm (e.g., from
multiple hours to a couple of minutes, for the problems we
consider in this paper) [37]. The approximation guarantee
in this subsection relies on the fact that selecting more cam-
era poses never reduces coverage, i.e., our coverage func-
tion exhibits a property known as monotonicity [37]. We
include a more detailed discussion of the greedy algorithm,
and provide pseudocode, in the supplementary material.
5.2. Additive Approximation of Coverage
Our goal in this subsection is to construct an additive ap-
proximation of coverage. In other words, we would like to
deﬁne an additive reward at each node in our graph, that
closely approximates our coverage function for arbitrary
subsets of visited nodes.
To construct our additive approximation, we draw inspi-
ration from the approach of Iyer et al. [32, 33]. We be-
gin by choosing a permutation of elements in our coarsened
ground set. Let C = c0, c1, . . . , cN be our permutation,
where ci is the ith element of our coarsened ground set in
5

permuted order. Let Ci = {c0, c1, . . . , ci−1} be the subset
containing the ﬁrst i elements of our permutation. We de-
ﬁne the additive reward for each element in our permutation
as ˜fi = f(Ci ∪ci) −f(Ci). For an arbitrary subset CS,
our additive approximation is simply the sum of additive re-
wards for each element in CS. Due to submodularity, this
additive approximation is guaranteed to be exact for all sub-
sets Ci, and to underestimate our true coverage function for
all other subsets. This guarantee is useful for our purposes,
because any solution we get from optimizing our additive
approximation will yield an equal or greater reward on our
true coverage function.
When choosing a permutation, it is generally advanta-
geous to place camera poses with the greatest marginal re-
ward at the front of our permutation. With this intuition in
mind, we form our permutation by sorting the camera poses
in our coarsened ground set according to their marginal re-
ward. Fortunately, we have already computed this ordering
in Section 5.1 using the greedy algorithm. So, we simply
reuse this ordering to construct our additive approximation.
5.3. Orienteering as an Integer Linear Program
After constructing our additive approximation of cover-
age, we obtain the following additive orienteering problem,
P⋆= arg max
P
X
CP
˜fi
subject to
l(P) ≤B
p0 = pq = proot
(4)
where ˜fi is the additive reward for each unique node along
the path P. In its current form, it is still not clear how to
solve this problem efﬁciently, because we must still search
over an exponential number of paths through our graph.
Fortunately, we can express this problem as a compact inte-
ger linear program, using a formulation suggested by Letch-
ford et al. [38]. We transform our undirected graph into a
directed graph, and we deﬁne integer variables to represent
if nodes are visited and directed edges are traversed. Re-
markably, we can constrain the conﬁguration of these inte-
ger variables to form only valid paths through our graph,
with a compact set of linear constraints. We include a more
detailed derivation of this formulation in the supplementary
material.
Leveraging the formulation suggested by Letchford et
al., we convert the problem in equation (4) into a standard
form that can be given directly to an off-the-shelf solver.
We use the modeling language CVXPY [14] to specify our
problem, and we use the commercially available Gurobi
Optimizer [25] as the back-end solver. Solving integer pro-
gramming problems to global optimality is NP-hard, and
can take a very long time, so we specify a solver time limit
of 5 minutes. Gurobi returns the best feasible solution it
ﬁnds within the time limit, along with a worst-case optimal-
ity gap. In our experience, Gurobi consistently converges
to a close-to-optimal solution in the allotted time (i.e., typ-
ically with an optimality gap of less than 10%). At this
point, the resulting orienteering trajectory can be safely and
autonomously executed on our drone.
6. Evaluation
In all the experiments described in this section, we ex-
ecute all drone ﬂights at 2 meters per second, with a total
travel budget of 960 meters (i.e., an 8 minute ﬂight) un-
less otherwise noted. All ﬂights generate 1 image every 3.5
meters. Each method has the same travel budget, and gen-
erates roughly 275 images. Small variations in the number
of generated images are possible, due to differences in how
close each method gets to the travel budget. We describe our
drone hardware, data acquisition pipeline, and experimental
methodology in more detail in the supplementary material.
Real-World Reconstruction Performance We evalu-
ated the real-world reconstruction performance of our al-
gorithm by using it to scan three large outdoor scenes: a
barn, an ofﬁce building, and an industrial site.1 We show
results from these experiments in Figures 1 and 4, as well
as in the supplementary material. We compared our recon-
struction results to two baseline methods: OVERHEAD and
RANDOM.
OVERHEAD. We designed OVERHEAD to generate tra-
jectories that are representative of those produced by exist-
ing commercial ﬂight planning software [1, 46]. OVER-
HEAD generates a single ﬂight at at a safe height above
the scene; consisting of an orbit path that always points the
camera at the center of the scene; followed by a lawnmower
path that always points the camera straight down.
RANDOM. We designed RANDOM to have roughly the
same level of scene understanding as our algorithm, except
that RANDOM does not optimize our coverage function. We
gave RANDOM access to the graph of camera positions gen-
erated by our algorithm, which had been pruned according
to the free space in the scene. RANDOM generates trajecto-
ries by randomly selecting graph nodes to visit and traveling
to them via shortest paths, until no more nodes can be vis-
ited due to the travel budget. RANDOM always points the
camera towards the center of the scene, which is a reason-
able strategy for the scenes we consider in this paper.
During our explore phase, we generate an orbit trajectory
exactly as we do for OVERHEAD. For the scenes we con-
sider in this paper, this initial orbit trajectory is always less
than 250 meters.
When generating 3D reconstructions, our algorithm and
RANDOM have access to the images from our explore phase,
1We conducted this experiment with an early implementation of our
method that differs slightly from the implementation used in our other ex-
periments. In particular, the graph of camera positions used in this experi-
ment included diagonal edges. We subsequently excluded diagonal edges
to enable our integer programming formulation to scale to larger problem
instances.
6

Figure 4. Qualitative comparison of the 3D reconstructions obtained from an overhead trajectory, a random trajectory, and our trajectory
for two real-world scenes. Our reconstructions contain noticeably fewer visual artifacts than the baseline reconstructions. In all our
experiments, we control for the ﬂight time, battery consumption, number of images, and quality settings used in the 3D reconstruction.
Figure 5. Quantitative comparison of the 3D reconstructions obtained from an overhead trajectory, a random trajectory, a next-best-view
trajectory, and our trajectory for our synthetic scene. We show close-up renderings of each reconstruction, as well as per-pixel visual error,
relative to a ground truth rendering of the scene. Our method leads to quantitatively lower visual error than baseline methods.
but OVERHEAD does not. The images in our explore phase
are nearly identical to the orbit images from OVERHEAD,
and would therefore provide OVERHEAD with negligible
additional information, so all three methods are directly
comparable.
We generated 3D reconstructions using the
commercially available Pix4Dmapper Pro software [47],
conﬁgured with maximum quality settings.
Reconstruction Performance on a Synthetic Scene We
evaluated our algorithm using a photorealistic video game
simulator, which enabled us to measure reconstruction per-
formance relative to known ground truth geometry and ap-
pearance. We show results from this experiment in Figure 5
and Table 1.
Our experimental design here is exactly as described pre-
viously, except we acquired images by programmatically
maneuvering a virtual camera in the Unreal Engine [18], us-
ing the UnrealCV Python library [48]. We also included an
additional baseline method, NEXT-BEST-VIEW, that greed-
ily selects nodes according to their marginal submodular
reward, and ﬁnds an efﬁcient path to connect them using
the Approx-TSP algorithm [12] until no more nodes can be
added due to the travel budget. This method is intended to
be representative of the next-best-view planning strategies
that occur frequently in the literature [19, 29, 36, 68], in-
cluding those that have been applied to aerial 3D scanning
[16, 30, 44, 49].
7

Method
Accuracy
Completeness
Visual
Error (mm)
Error (mm)
Error (%)
Overhead
170.2
583.8
7.1
Random
126.5
557.2
4.4
Next-Best-View
122.8
330.7
3.6
Ours
115.2
323.3
3.3
Table 1.
Quantitative comparison of the 3D reconstructions ob-
tained from an overhead trajectory, a random trajectory, a next-
best-view trajectory, and our trajectory for our synthetic scene. For
all the columns in this table, lower is better. We report the mean
per-pixel visual error across all of our test views, where 100% per-
pixel error corresponds to the l2 norm of the difference between
black and white in RGB space. Our method quantitatively out-
performs baseline methods, both geometrically (i.e., in terms of
accuracy and completeness) and visually.
We chose the GRASS LANDS environment [17] as our
synthetic test scene because it is freely available, has photo-
realistic lighting and very detailed geometry, and depicts a
large outdoor scene that would be well-suited for 3D scan-
ning with a drone.
We evaluated geometric reconstruction quality by mea-
suring accuracy and completeness relative to a ground truth
point cloud [2, 35]. We obtained our ground truth point
cloud by rendering reference depth images arranged on
an inward-looking sphere around the scene, taking care to
manually remove any depth images that were inside objects.
We also evaluated visual reconstruction quality by measur-
ing per-pixel visual error, relative to ground truth RGB im-
ages rendered from the same inward-looking sphere around
the scene [59]. When evaluating per-pixel visual error, we
took care to only compare pixels that contain geometry from
inside the scanning region-of-interest for our scene.
When evaluating geometric quality, we obtained point
clouds for each method by running VisualSFM [64, 65, 66,
67], followed by the Multi-View Environment [20], fol-
lowed by Screened Poisson Surface Reconstruction [34],
and ﬁnally by uniformly sampling points on the recon-
structed triangle mesh surface.
When evaluating visual
quality, we obtained textured 3D models for each method
using the surface texturing algorithm of Waechter et al. [60].
Submodular Orienteering Performance We evaluated
the submodular orienteering performance of our algorithm
on our synthetic scene. We performed this experiment after
we have solved for the optimal camera orientation at every
node in our graph, to facilitate the comparison of our algo-
rithm to other submodular orienteering algorithms [53, 69].
We show results from this experiment in Figure 6.
In this experiment, we included a baseline method that
behaves identically to NEXT-BEST-VIEW, except it greed-
ily selects nodes according to the ratio of marginal re-
ward to marginal cost [69]. We implemented all algorithms
in Python, except for the p-SPIEL Orienteering algorithm
[53], where we used the MATLAB implementation pro-
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Travel Budget (meters)
(a)
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
Reward (unitless)
Submodular Orienteering Reward
as a Function of Travel Budget
Ours
Next-Best-View
Next-Best-View (reward vs cost)
p-SPIEL Orienteering
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Travel Budget (meters)
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Computation Time (minutes)
Submodular Orienteering Computation Time
as a Function of Travel Budget
Ours
Next-Best-View
Next-Best-View (reward vs cost)
Figure 6.
Quantitative comparison of submodular orienteering
algorithms on our synthetic scene. (a) Submodular reward as a
function of travel budget. Our algorithm consistently obtains more
reward than other algorithms. All reconstruction results in this pa-
per were produced with a budget of 960 meters (i.e., 8 minutes at 2
meters per second), shown with a grey dotted line. For this budget,
we obtain 20% more reward than next-best-view planning. The
p-SPIEL Orienteering algorithm [53] failed to consistently ﬁnd a
solution. (b) Computation time as a function of travel budget. On
this plot, lower is better. In terms of computation time, our algo-
rithm is competitive with, but more expensive than, next-best-view
planning. We do not show computation times for the p-SPIEL Ori-
enteering algorithm, because it took over 4 hours in all cases where
it found a solution.
vided by the authors. We performed this experiment on a
Mid 2015 Macbook Pro with a 2.8 GHz Intel Core i7 pro-
cessor and 16GB of RAM.
7. Conclusions
We proposed an intuitive coverage model for aerial 3D
scanning, and we made the observation that our model is
submodular. We leveraged submodularity to develop a com-
putationally efﬁcient method for generating scanning tra-
jectories, that reasons jointly about coverage rewards and
travel costs. We evaluated our method by using it to scan
three large real-world scenes, and a scene in a photorealistic
video game simulator. We found that our method results in
quantitatively higher-quality 3D reconstructions than base-
line methods, both geometrically and visually.
In the future, we believe trajectory optimization and geo-
metric reasoning will enable drones to capture the physical
world with unprecedented coverage and scale. Individual
drones may soon be able to execute very efﬁcient scanning
trajectories at the limits of their dynamics, and teams of
drones may soon be able to execute scanning trajectories
collectively and iteratively over very large scenes.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jim Piavis and Ross Robinson for their exper-
tise as our safety pilots; Don Gillett for granting us per-
mission to scan the barn scene; 3D Robotics for granting
us permission to scan the industrial scene; Weichao Qiu for
his assistance with the UnrealCV Python library; Jane E and
Abe Davis for proofreading the paper; and Okke Schrijvers
for the helpful discussions. This work was supported by a
generous grant from Google.
8

References
[1] 3D Robotics. Site Scan. http://3dr.com, 2017.
[2] H. Aanæs, R. R. Jensen, G. Vogiatzis, E. Tola, and A. B.
Dahl. Large-scale data for multiple-view stereopsis. IJCV,
120(2), 2016.
[3] K. Alexis, C. Papachristos, R. Siegwart, and A. Tzes. Uni-
form coverage structural inspection path-planning for micro
aerial vehicles. In IEEE International Symposium on Intelli-
gent Control 2015.
[4] A. Bircher, K. Alexis, M. Burri, P. Oettershagen, S. Omari,
T. Mantel, and R. Siegwart. Structural inspection path plan-
ning via iterative viewpoint resampling with application to
aerial robotics. In International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) 2015.
[5] A. Bircher, M. Kamel, K. Alexis, H. Oleynikova, and
R. Siegwart. Receding horizon “next-best-view” planner for
3D exploration. In International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) 2016.
[6] B. Charrow, G. Kahn, S. Patil, S. Liu, K. Goldberg,
P. Abbeel, N. Michael, and V. Kumar. Information-theoretic
planning with trajectory optimization for dense 3D mapping.
In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) 2015.
[7] B. Charrow, S. Liu, V. Kumar, and N. Michael. Information-
theoretic mapping using Cauchy-Schwarz quadratic mutual
information. In International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) 2015.
[8] C. Chekuri, N. Korula, and M. Pal. Improved algorithms
for orienteering and related problems. Transactions on Algo-
rithms, 8(3), 2012.
[9] C. Chekuri and M. Pal. A recursive greedy algorithm for
walks in directed graphs. In Foundations of Computer Sci-
ence (FOCS) 2005.
[10] S. Chen, Y. Li, and N. M. Kwok. Active vision in robotic
systems: A survey of recent developments.
International
Journal of Robotics Research, 30(11), 2011.
[11] S. Choudhury, A. Kapoor, G. Ranade, and D. Dey. Learning
to gather information via imitation. International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 2017.
[12] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein.
Introduction to Algorithms, Third Edition. MIT Press, 2009.
[13] A. Davis, M. Levoy, and F. Durand. Unstructured light ﬁelds.
Computer Graphics Forum (Proc. Eurographics 2012), 31(2,
Part 1), 2012.
[14] S. Diamond and S. Boyd.
CVXPY: A Python-embedded
modeling language for convex optimization. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 17(83), 2016.
[15] E. Dunn and J.-M. Frahm. Next best view planning for ac-
tive model improvement. In Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS) 2009.
[16] E. Dunn, J. van den Berg, and J.-M. Frahm.
Developing
visual sensing strategies through next best view planning. In
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) 2009.
[17] Epic Games.
Inﬁnity Blade:
Grass Lands.
http:
//www.unrealengine.com/marketplace/
infinity-blade-plain-lands, 2017.
[18] Epic
Games.
Unreal
Engine.
http://www.
unrealengine.com, 2017.
[19] X. Fan, L. Zhang, B. Brown, and S. Rusinkiewicz. Auto-
mated view and path planning for scalable multi-object 3D
scanning. Transactions on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia
2016), 35(6), 2016.
[20] S. Fuhrmann, F. Langguth, N. Moehrle, M. Waechter, and
M. Goesele. MVE-An image-based reconstruction environ-
ment. Computer Graphics Forum, 53(Part A), 2015.
[21] Y. Furukawa and C. Hernandez. Multi-View Stereo: A Tuto-
rial. Now Publishers, 2015.
[22] E. Galceran and M. Carreras.
A survey of coverage path
planning for robotics. Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
61(12), 2013.
[23] B. Ghanem, Y. Cao, and P. Wonka. Designing camera net-
works by convex quadratic programming. Computer Graph-
ics Forum (Proc. Eurographics 2015), 34(2), 2015.
[24] A. Gunawan, H. C. Laua, and P. Vansteenwegenb. Orien-
teering problem: A survey of recent variants, solution ap-
proaches and applications. European Journal of Operational
Research, 255(2), 2016.
[25] Gurobi. Gurobi Optimizer. http://www.gurobi.com,
2017.
[26] L. Heng, A. Gotovos, A. Krause, and M. Pollefeys. Efﬁcient
visual exploration and coverage with a micro aerial vehicle
in unknown environments. In International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 2015.
[27] L. Heng, D. Honegger, G. H. Lee, L. Meier, P. Tanskanen,
F. Fraundorfer, and M. Pollefeys. Autonomous visual map-
ping and exploration with a micro aerial vehicle. Journal of
Field Robotics, 31(4), 2014.
[28] L. Heng, G. H. Lee, F. Fraundorfer, and M. Pollefeys. Real-
time photo-realistic 3D mapping for micro aerial vehicles. In
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) 2011.
[29] G. A. Hollinger, B. Englot, F. S. Hover, U. Mitra, and G. S.
Sukhatme. Active planning for underwater inspection and
the beneﬁt of adaptivity. International Journal of Robotics
Research, 32(1), 2013.
[30] C. Hoppe, A. Wendel, S. Zollmann, K. Pirker, A. Irschara,
H. Bischof, and S. Kluckner. Photogrammetric camera net-
work design for micro aerial vehicles. In Computer Vision
Winter Workshop 2012.
[31] A. Hornung, B. Zeng, and L. Kobbelt. Image selection for
improved multi-view stereo. In CVPR 2008.
[32] R. Iyer and J. Bilmes. Submodular optimization with sub-
modular cover and submodular knapsack constraints.
In
NIPS 2013.
[33] R. Iyer, S. Jegelka, and J. Bilmes. Fast semidifferential-based
submodular function optimization. In ICML 2013.
[34] M. Kazhdan and H. Hoppe. Screened Poisson surface recon-
struction. Transactions on Graphics, 32(3), 2013.
[35] A. Knapitsch, J. Park, Q.-Y. Zhou, and V. Koltun. Tanks
and temples: Benchmarking large-scale scene reconstruc-
tion. Transactions on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH 2017),
36(4), 2017.
[36] M. Krainin, B. Curless, and D. Fox. Autonomous generation
of complete 3D object models using next best view manip-
ulation planning. In International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA) 2011.
9

[37] A. Krause and D. Golovin. Submodular function maximiza-
tion. In Tractability: Practical Approaches to Hard Prob-
lems. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[38] A. N. Letchford, S. D. Nasirib, and D. O. Theis.
Com-
pact formulations of the Steiner traveling salesman problem
and related problems. European Journal of Operational Re-
search, 228(1), 2013.
[39] G. Loianno, J. Thomas, and V. Kumar. Cooperative local-
ization and mapping of MAVs using RGB-D sensors. In In-
ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
2015.
[40] M. Mauro, H. Riemenschneider, L. V. Gool, A. Signoroni,
and R. Leonardi.
A uniﬁed framework for content-aware
view selection and planning through view importance. In
BMVC 2014.
[41] M. Mauro, H. Riemenschneider, A. Signoroni, R. Leonardi,
and L. V. Gool. An integer linear programming model for
view selection on overlapping camera clusters. In 3DV 2014.
[42] A. Mavrinac and X. Chen. Modeling coverage in camera
networks: A survey. IJCV, 101(1), 2013.
[43] N. Michael, S. Shen, K. Mohta, Y. Mulgaonkar, V. Kumar,
K. Nagatani, Y. Okada, S. Kiribayashi, K. Otake, K. Yoshida,
K. Ohno, E. Takeuchi, and S. Tadokoro. Collaborative map-
ping of an earthquake-damaged building via ground and
aerial robots. Journal of Field Robotics, 29(5), 2012.
[44] C. Mostegel, M. Rumpler, F. Fraundorfer, and H. Bischof.
UAV-based autonomous image acquisition with multi-view
stereo quality assurance by conﬁdence prediction. In CVPR
Workshop on Computer Vision in Vehicle Technology 2016.
[45] Pix4D. Projeto redentor white paper, 2015.
[46] Pix4D. Pix4Dcapture. http://pix4d.com/product/
pix4dcapture, 2017.
[47] Pix4D.
Pix4Dmapper Pro.
http://pix4d.com/
product/pix4dmapper-pro, 2017.
[48] W. Qiu and A. Yuille. UnrealCV: Connecting computer vi-
sion to Unreal Engine. arXiv, 2016.
[49] K. Schmid, H. Hirschmuller, A. Domel, I. Grixa, M. Suppa,
and G. Hirzinger. View planning for multi-view stereo 3D
reconstruction using an autonomous multicopter. Journal of
Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 65(1), 2012.
[50] W. R. Scott, G. Roth, and J.-F. Rivest. View planning for au-
tomated three-dimensional object reconstruction and inspec-
tion. Computing Surveys, 35(1), 2003.
[51] S. Shen, N. Michael, and V. Kumar. Autonomous indoor
3D exploration with a micro-aerial vehicle. In International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 2012.
[52] A. Singh, A. Krause, C. Guestrin, and W. J. Kaiser. Efﬁ-
cient informative sensing using multiple robots. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 34(1), 2009.
[53] A. Singh, A. Krause, and W. J. Kaiser. Nonmyopic adap-
tive informative path planning for multiple robots. In Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artiﬁcal Intelligence (IJCAI)
2009.
[54] J. Sturm, E. Bylow, F. Kahl, and D. Cremers. Dense track-
ing and mapping with a quadrocopter. In Unmanned Aeriel
Vehicles in Geomatics 2013.
[55] K. A. Tarabanis, P. K. Allen, and R. Y. Tsai. A survey of sen-
sor planning in computer vision. Transactions on Robotics
and Automation, 11(1), 1995.
[56] S. Thrun, W. Burgard, and D. Fox. Probabilistic Robotics.
MIT Press, 2005.
[57] P. Vansteenwegena, W. Souffriaua, and D. V. Oudheusden.
The orienteering problem: A survey. European Journal of
Operational Research, 209(1), 2011.
[58] L. von Stumberg, V. Usenko, J. Engel, J. Stuckler, and
D. Cremers.
Autonomous exploration with a low-cost
quadrocopter using semi-dense monocular SLAM.
arXiv,
2016.
[59] M. Waechter, M. Beljan, S. Fuhrmann, N. Moehrle, J. Kopf,
and M. Goesele. Virtual rephotography: Novel view predic-
tion error for 3D reconstruction. Transactions on Graphics,
36(1), 2017.
[60] M. Waechter, N. Moehrle, and M. Goesele.
Let there be
color! Large-scale texturing of 3D reconstructions. In ECCV
2014.
[61] P. Wang, R. Krishnamurti, and K. Gupta.
View planning
problem with combined view and traveling cost. In Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 2007.
[62] A. Wendel, M. Maurer, G. Graber, T. Pock, and H. Bischof.
Dense reconstruction on-the-ﬂy. In CVPR 2012.
[63] D. N. Wood, D. I. Azuma, K. Aldinger, B. Curless,
T. Duchamp, D. H. Salesin, and W. Stuetzle. Surface light
ﬁelds for 3D photography. Transactions on Graphics (Proc.
SIGGRAPH 2000), 35(1), 2000.
[64] C. Wu. Towards linear-time incremental structure from mo-
tion. In 3DV 2013.
[65] C. Wu.
SiftGPU: A GPU implementation of scale in-
varaint feature transform (SIFT). http://cs.unc.edu/
˜ccwu/siftgpu, 2007.
[66] C. Wu. VisualSFM: A visual structure from motion system.
http://ccwu.me/vsfm, 2011.
[67] C. Wu, S. Agarwal, B. Curless, and S. M. Seitz. Multicore
bundle adjustment. In CVPR 2011.
[68] S. Wu, W. Sun, P. Long, H. Huang, D. Cohen-Or, M. Gong,
O. Deussen, and B. Chen.
Quality-driven Poisson-guided
autoscanning. Transactions on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH
Asia 2014), 33(6), 2014.
[69] H. Zhang and Y. Vorobeychik.
Submodular optimization
with routing constraints. In Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence (AAAI) 2016.
10
