1 
 
A Review on Viewpoints and Path-planning for 
UAV-based 3D Reconstruction 
Mehdi Maboudi1*, MohammadReza Homaei2, Soohwan Song3, Shirin Malihi4,5, Mohammad Saadatseresht2, and 
Markus Gerke1 
1Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Germany 
2School of Surveying and Geospatial Eng., College of Eng., University of Tehran, Tehran 1439957131, Iran 
3Intelligent Robotics Research Division, ETRI, Daejeon 34129, Republic of Korea 
4Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, New York, NY 11201, USA 
5School of Engineering, Institute for Infrastructure and Environment, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 
ABSTRACT: 
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are widely used platforms to carry data capturing sensors for various applications. The 
reason for this success can be found in many aspects: the high maneuverability of the UAVs, the capability of performing 
autonomous data acquisition, flying at different heights, and the possibility to reach almost any vantage point. The selection 
of appropriate viewpoints and planning the optimum trajectories of UAVs is an emerging topic that aims at increasing the 
automation, efficiency and reliability of the data capturing process to achieve a dataset with desired quality. On the other hand, 
3D reconstruction using the data captured by UAVs is also attracting attention in research and industry. This review paper 
investigates a wide range of model-free and model-based algorithms for viewpoint and path planning for 3D reconstruction of 
large-scale objects. The analyzed approaches are limited to those that employ a single-UAV as a data capturing platform for 
outdoor 3D reconstruction purposes. In addition to discussing the evaluation strategies, this paper also highlights the 
innovations and limitations of the investigated approaches. It concludes with a critical analysis of the existing challenges and 
future research perspectives. 
Keywords: Viewpoint planning, Path planning, UAV, Drone, 3D reconstruction, Aerial photogrammetry, Active vision, View-
path planning 
1 
Introduction 
A complete dataset which meets the predefined quality measures is the fundamental input for various 
applications like 3D reconstruction of large-scale complex objects with a high level of details (for example cultural 
heritage documentation), inspection of construction sites, and Building Information Modeling (BIM) just to name 
a few. Many sensors and platforms for capturing high-quality images and point clouds have been introduced in 
the last decades. Especially, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are widely used as platforms to carry data capturing 
sensors. More specifically, multi-copters (from this point forward we use the term UAV to refer to multi-copter) 
are agile, capable of performing autonomous data acquisition, can fly at different heights, and can reach almost 
any vantage point (Song et al., 2021). Hence, UAV-based 3D reconstruction is still attracting attention as a 
promising approach for generating semantic and geometric information about man-made and natural objects. 
UAVs are utilized in various monitoring and inspection projects, for example, in agriculture (González-Jorge 
et al., 2017; Radoglou-Grammatikis et al., 2020), forestry (Torresan et al., 2016), environmental sciences (Eltner 
et al., 2022; Eskandari et al., 2020), Hydrology (Acharya et al., 2021), industrial inspection of large structures 
(Maboudi et al., 2021; Seo et al., 2018; Sun and Ma, 2022), Virtual Reality (Sharma et al., 2019) and civil 
engineering (Debus and Rodehorst, 2021; Jacob-Loyola et al., 2021; Rakha and Gorodetsky, 2018). Especially 
the demand for high-quality 3D models in many applications such as construction (Li and Liu, 2018), urban 
modelling (Malihi et al., 2018; Song et al., 2021), aerial cinematography (Bucker et al., 2020), transportation 
(Sahebdivani et al., 2020; Xu and Turkan, 2020), landscape planning, archeology (Fiz et al., 2022), emergency 
rescue, and disaster analysis (Kerle et al., 2019) is still increasing. Nevertheless, restricted access to the objects 
                                                          
* Corresponding author: m.maboudi@tu-bs.de 
Preprint submitted to Journal 
7 May 2022 

2 
 
and practical considerations like limited flight time, safety protocols, battery constraints, and legal regulations 
should also be considered. Furthermore, 3D reconstruction of complex objects with high level of details 
necessitate a thorough viewpoint and flight path planning. The quality of such 3D reconstructions highly depends 
on the acquisition process and camera network configuration (Koch et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020a).  
Although it is possible to generate 3D reconstruction products with impressive quality using state-of-the-art 
algorithms, the success of these reconstruction methods depends to a large degree on the input images with 
predefined specifications (Hepp et al., 2018b; Hoppe et al., 2012; Saponaro et al., 2019; Schmid et al., 2012; Seitz 
et al., 2006; Song et al., 2020a). Furthermore, adding more images cannot always deliver better reconstruction, 
and even diminishing returns at some points are reported in the literature (Hepp, 2018; Hornung et al., 2008; Seitz 
et al., 2006). Moreover, due to the limited battery capacity of the current UAVs and possible restrictions in 
accessing the area of interest, data capturing should be performed in a limited time (Smith et al., 2018). Hence, 
efficient viewpoint and path planning algorithms are required to capture the data for the successful reconstruction 
of 3D objects with various sizes, shapes, and complexities (Kaba et al., 2017; Kuang et al., 2020; Roberts, 2019; 
Song et al., 2020b).  
The selection of appropriate viewpoints and trajectory for 3D reconstruction has been a research topic for 
some decades (Ahmadabadian et al., 2014; Aloimonos et al., 1988; Connolly, 1985; Debus and Rodehorst, 2021; 
Peng and Isler, 2017; Scott et al., 2003; Song et al., 2021). In robotics, view and path planning is a research focus 
of many studies on 3D reconstruction to make the robots explore and reconstruct unknown environments more 
competently (Chen et al., 2011; Scaramuzza et al., 2014; Scott et al., 2003). This task is known as the active vision 
or view-path-planning problem in robotics (Roberts et al., 2017; Song et al., 2021). In Photogrammetry, the 
problem of determining the optimal viewpoints for accurate measurement of 3D scenes or objects is called camera 
network design (Fraser, 1984; Hoppe et al., 2012; Mason, 1997; Saadatseresht et al., 2005) where mainly the 
geometric aspects of the problem are investigated in controlled environments for highly accurate measurement of 
artificial targets using convergent imaging. 
1.1 Scope of the paper: 
The review includes peer-reviewed publications and theses, focusing on wide range of model-free and model-
based algorithms on viewpoint and path planning for 3D reconstruction of large-scale objects. In addition to 
discussing the evaluations strategies, this paper also highlights the innovations and limitations of the investigated 
approaches. It concludes with a critical analysis of the existing challenges and future research perspectives. Since 
various platforms and sensors are employed for different 3D reconstruction applications, we exclude the studies 
which are not within the scope of this paper.   
Platform: Many researchers in robotics and other communities investigate view and path planning for 
moving robots, UGVs (Unmanned Ground Vehicles) and wheeled robots (Cao et al., 2021; Hosseininaveh and 
Remondino, 2021; Huang et al., 2020), Autonomous Underwater vehicles (Panda et al., 2020), robotic arms 
(Bogaerts et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2014) as well as multi-UAVs (Jing et al., 2020; Nagasawa et al., 2021; Sadeghi 
et al., 2019) for optimal data capturing. Although there are some common issues between path planning for these 
platforms and UAVs, the assumptions, challenges, trajectories, platforms abilities, and environmental conditions 
could be very different. For example, in contrast to UGVs, UAVs should consider a 6D search space for the sensor 
poses within the reconstruction workflow (Schmid et al., 2012). Therefore, this paper focuses on viewpoint and 
path planning for a single UAV. 
Sensor and 3D representation: Various sensors are installed on UAVs for data capturing in different 
applications (Nex et al., 2022). Monocular RGB camera (Song et al., 2020a), RGB-D sensor (Hardouin et al., 
2020), depth cameras (Deris et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2021), structured light scanners (Ułanowicz and Sabak, 2021), 
multi-spectral camera (DadrasJavan et al., 2019), stereo cameras and LiDAR (Alsadik and Remondino, 2020; 
Bolourian and Hammad, 2020; Yoder and Scherer, 2016) are the most commonly used sensors (Yan et al., 2021). 
Compared to single RGB cameras, other sensors entail special hardware and setup, making them very efficient 
for some applications. However, it usually comes at the cost of more technical requirements, bounds applications 
and makes them more expensive. Different 3D representation methods have been developed depending on the 
type of scanning sensors. Images acquired from a monocular camera are generally processed by MVS algorithms 
(Schönberger et al., 2016) to reconstruct 3D models. MVS generates a dense 3D reconstruction offline by 
matching the stereo correspondences of all images. This method can estimate a wide range of depths based on 
various baseline distances of images; therefore, MVS is appropriate for large-scale modeling. RGB-D sensors and 

3 
 
stereo cameras can estimate accurate and dense depth maps in real-time. The estimated depth maps can be 
integrated into a volumetric model or a surface model by the volumetric mapping (Hornung et al., 2013) or TSDF 
mapping (Whelan et al., 2014), respectively. Volumetric models represent a coarse 3D shape based on occupancy 
probability, whereas surface models represent the precise surfaces of an object. LiDAR can acquire very accurate 
point cloud data in real-time. The point clouds are relatively sparse compared to the depth maps acquired from 
depth sensors and cannot represent dense surfaces. Therefore, LiDAR-based methods (Qin et al., 2019; Yoder and 
Scherer, 2016) generally employ the volumetric mapping method for scanning. 
Application: Geometric criteria like completeness and accuracy of the 3D models acquired from UAV 
missions are the most interesting properties discussed in the literature (Roberts et al., 2017). However, researchers 
also aimed at other properties like semantic information, which could be extracted from the UAV data (Popovic 
et al., 2017; Stache et al., 2021; Valente et al., 2013). Apart from many other applications like precision agriculture 
(Basiri et al., 2022; Just et al., 2020), indoor exploration and reconstruction (Shen et al., 2012; Sun et al., 2021; 
Zhu et al., 2018) to name a few, we focus on viewpoint and path planning for 3D reconstruction of complex 
outdoor man-made objects like buildings and bridges which is a topic of interest for many applications 
(Almadhoun et al., 2019). A closely related topic is coverage path planning (Bircher et al., 2015; Galceran and 
Carreras, 2013; Kaba et al., 2017; Peng and Isler, 2020; Shang et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2021) which deals with 
optimizing the trajectories that cover a known 2D or 3D environment. This topic could be considered as a set-
cover problem (Jing et al., 2019) or an art gallery problem followed by the shortest path optimization (Almadhoun 
et al., 2016; Heng et al., 2015; Papachristos et al., 2019a). However, since these approaches do not consider MVS 
heuristics and 3D reconstruction requirements and the optimal coverage path with low overlapped rate is desired, 
they are out of the scope of this paper. 
1.2 SfM and MVS heuristics in viewpoint planning 
Since many of the 3D reconstruction approaches rely on structure from motion (SfM) and multi-view stereo 
(MVS), we shortly list the most important heuristics as follows (see also Figure 1a): 
(1) Distance: the distance between camera viewpoints and object surface defines the resulting model 
resolution and depends on the desired GSD and the camera intrinsics (Koch et al., 2019; Peng and Isler, 
2018). 
(2) Multiple views: every part of the scene has to be observed from multiple views (theoretically at least two 
views and practically more for increasing the reliability and accuracy of 3D reconstruction) from 
different perspectives with sufficient overlap between the views. Matching the corresponding points in 
overlapping images is the prerequisite for robust camera poses estimation and for triangulating 3D object 
points (Hoppe et al., 2012; Mostegel et al., 2016; Roberts et al., 2017; Schmid et al., 2012). 
(3) Observation and parallax angle: Shallow observation angles between the optical-axis of the cameras and 
surface normals are preferred in MVS. Moreover, large parallax angles (a.k.a angular separation) 
between cameras (also known as the B/H ratio in photogrammetry) are favored to increase the 
triangulation quality. However, it makes it more difficult to find correspondences (matching) between 
the images, especially for complex 3D structures (Koch, 2020; Mostegel et al., 2016; Peng and Isler, 
2019; Smith et al., 2018). 
Various models are used in the literature to control these parameters (Koch, 2020; Peng and Isler, 2018; 
Roberts, 2019). Three examples are illustrated in Figure 1b-d. 
 
 
a 
b 
c 
d 
Figure 1: SfM and MVS heuristics in viewpoint planning: a) Parameters, b) co-apex cones for forcing the suitable cameras to adhere to the 
heuristics, c) considering the segments of a hemisphere for viewpoint planning (Koch, 2020), and d) MVS-aware coverage model (Roberts, 
2019) 

4 
 
The parameters defined above are visualized in Figure 1a. The strategy which is used in (Koch, 2020) is 
illustrated in Figure 1b, where a hemisphere is considered around the sample point. While the hemisphere is 
divided into four segments, the ideal camera constellations intersect the hemisphere in different segments. The 
coverage model introduced by (Roberts, 2019) is depicted in Figure 1c. Since each camera covers a disk area on 
the hemisphere around the sample point, the usefulness of the cameras is measured by total solid angle covered 
by all the disks. 
1.3 Problem formulation  
Since different terms, objectives, priorities and approaches are utilized for viewpoints and path planning in 
various communities, we formulate the problem again to provide a holistic definition that covers different 
strategies and nomenclature, consistently. 
Determining “good”, “ideal” or “reasonable” imaging positions is a common research topic in various 
communities such as robotics, computer graphics, computer vision, and photogrammetry (Hoppe et al., 2012). In 
UAV-based research, some viewpoint and path planning approaches (Hoppe et al., 2012; Schmid et al., 2012) 
solve the planning problem in two steps: The first step solves the optimum viewpoint while ignoring the travel 
budget and the second step, minimizes the cost of visiting all viewpoints which are computed in the first step. 
However, some other approaches solve both viewpoint and path planning problems in a unified approach (Hepp 
et al., 2018b; Roberts et al., 2017). This is mainly a domain specific concern and depends on the application and 
requirements/priorities. Giving priority to the reconstruction of the object is useful (usually leads to) first solving 
the camera poses (sensor placement, a.k.a viewpoint selection) and then finding the shortest/fastest trajectory to 
visit all those points. The constraints are defined on the object and quality has the highest priority. In this case, 
after computing the vantage viewpoints, TSP (shortest Hamiltonian path between the viewpoints) is a commonly 
used approach in the literature. On the other hand, giving priority to resources (flight time, trajectory length, or 
the number of the images) the constraints are defined on the sensor (also constrained by the obstacles). The aim 
would be to get as much as possible but hardly constrained by the resources. For maximum gain, the classical 
knapsack problem could be used. However, costs are not fixed in view-path planning (depending on the distance 
to the previous viewpoint). Therefore, this is a combination of knapsack and TSP which is called the orienteering 
problem (Gunawan et al., 2016; Vansteenwegen et al., 2011). The orienteering problem (reward-collecting graph 
optimization problem) was first introduced by (Golden et al., 1987). The objective is maximizing the total gain 
collected from visited nodes. Because of the limited time budget, all available nodes may not be selected. In 
orienteering problem marginal rewards are additive, but in MVS the usability of each camera is not additive and 
depends on some heuristics which could be defined considering the poses of other cameras. Different strategies 
are employed to tackle this problem (Hepp et al., 2018b; Roberts et al., 2017). Generally, we formulate the 
viewpoint and path planning as follows:  
Considering a camera 𝐾 with fixed intrinsics (at least during the data capturing) mounted on a drone, the 
objective of viewpoint and path planning is to find a feasible trajectory 𝛵 of the drone which meets some 
constraints 𝛺 and passes through optimal camera positions 𝑃= {𝑝1, 𝑝2, … , 𝑝𝑁} for taking high-quality pictures at 
optimal orientations Φ = {𝜑1, 𝜑2, … , 𝜑𝑁} to achieve a predefined quality 𝑄 as much as possible.  
The camera locations and orientations 𝒞= {{𝑝1, 𝜑1}, {𝑝2, 𝜑2}, … , {𝑝𝑁, 𝜑𝑁}} constitute a 6D search space. 
Generally, roll angle could be neglected in practice, resulting in a 5D search space for camera poses. Some 
researchers also add some more constraints (e.g. restricting the search space to a sphere around the object 
(Vasquez-Gomez et al., 2009), some adaptive planes (Peng and Isler, 2019), or height-wise data capturing (Sharma 
et al., 2019)). They further reduce the computations at the cost of having less chance to find the optimal solution. 
Various heuristics ℋ (cf. section 1.2 ) could be utilized to encourage the pose optimization algorithms to converge 
to a solution that meets the requirements of each specific application. 
There are also various and different constraints 𝛺 which could be considered during path planning. Battery 
life, the shortest path between viewpoints, detecting and avoiding permanent and moving obstacles, and excluding 
no-go areas in the scene are the main constraints that are investigated. 
Predefined quality 𝑄 of 3D reconstruction depends on the objective of the project and could be different in 
specific domains and applications. For example, in some applications wherein the full coverage of 3D 
reconstruction is very important, 𝑄 could be formulated as the completeness of the results and other metrics like 
the accuracy of the reconstructed object could be relaxed. On the other hand, in some domains in which the 

5 
 
accuracy is very important, other constraints have less priority, and accuracy has the highest weight in the 
planning. We will address these metrics in Section 3. 
2 
Viewpoint and path planning strategies 
Given that a maneuverable platform (e.g., UAV in our scope) is available, an initial tempting idea could be 
to capture so many images to achieve the best 3D reconstruction. Considering the limited endurance of the UAVs 
and also other practical flight-time limitations, diminishing returns and even destructive effect of adding views 
after some points (Hepp, 2018; Hornung et al., 2008; Seitz et al., 2006) and high computation cost of processing 
all images, this method is neither efficient nor applicable in real scenarios. Hence, most UAV-based reconstruction 
projects are currently performed either using manual piloting or using off-the-shelf commercial flight planning 
applications with the camera pointing in a fixed direction (Smith et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2021). Another idea could 
be to select/filter a subset of already densely captured images for 3D reconstruction to decrease the significant 
computational overheads and avoid the destructive effect of some images on the final product. These techniques 
require a complete set of already captured images to filter some of them to achieve high quality 3D reconstruction. 
(Mauro et al., 2014), which employs view importance measure for filtering the viewpoints and (Maldonado et al., 
2016), which is incremental NBV-based approach are two examples of this category. Besides data capturing time 
which still is a problem, the total computational cost of viewpoint selection and processing the remaining images 
could be close to the processing time of all images. Furthermore, camera locations are densely sampled and the 
other three parameters of camera pose namely rotations are not optimized. Some other approaches try to improve 
the output of regular pattern data capturing by estimating the missing parts and low-quality 3D reconstructed areas 
and iteratively adding some amending viewpoints to improve the final 3D product (Zhang et al., 2020). However, 
the best solution could be to have a holistic planning approach before starting data capturing which is the topic of 
a rich body of viewpoint and path planning literature in various research communities.  
Automated flight planning methods can be classified either as model-free or model-based methods (Jing et 
al., 2016; Kaba et al., 2017; Koch, 2020; Yan et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020). Model-based methods use an initial 
coarse model (geometric proxy or simply proxy) for generating optimal viewpoint and path planning. But, model-
free methods tackle the problem given that there is no such initial coarse model of the objects and environment 
and iteratively generate and update the model with new measurements. In the following parts of this section, we 
briefly discuss off-the-shelf mission planners. Afterward, we delve into the model-free and model-based methods. 
2.1 Off-the-shelf flight planners: 
The manual piloting is inevitable in some applications (Maboudi et al., 2021). However, the most common 
method for UAV-based data capturing in an automated fashion is to use an off-the-shelf flight planner, such as 
Pix4D capture2, Altizure3, Litchi4, DJI Terra5, DJI flight planner6, 3dr robotics7, Precisionhawk8, PixHawk Ardu 
mission Planner9, DroneDeploy10, precision flight, UgCS11.  
Usually offering limited parameter settings, commercial flight planners generate conservative trajectories 
(e.g., an orbit, a zigzag, or a lawnmower pattern at a safe flight height) to cover the scene (Koch et al., 2019; 
Kuang et al., 2020; Peng and Isler, 2019; Roberts et al., 2017). However, these trajectories are generated regardless 
of the scene geometry and structure and distribution of the objects. Hence, these tools tend to over-sample some 
regions (e.g., rooftops) while under- sampling others (e.g., facades, convex areas, overhangs, and fine details), 
especially in dense areas and complex objects, and therefore sacrifice reconstruction quality (Hepp et al., 2018b; 
Roberts, 2019; Zhou et al., 2020b). Furthermore, most of such planning tools do not directly choose viewpoints 
adhering to all SfM and MVS constraints and do not directly account for complete coverage of the scene. Recently 
Agisoft introduced a tool for designing an optimum path-planning for image capturing and creating mission plans 
based on the rough model (Agisoft, 2022; Zhang et al., 2020). In this tool, a set of camera positions are generated 
to cover the object’s surface with sufficient overlap. However, it cannot promise the completeness of the dataset 
in real-world situations, and the accuracy of the final point is not explicitly considered in this approach. Although 
                                                          
2 https://www.pix4d.com/product/pix4dcapture 
3 https://www.altizure.com/ 
44 https://flylitchi.com/  
5 https://www.dji.com/de/dji-terra 
6 https://www.djiflightplanner.com/ 
7 https://3drobotics.com/  
8 https://www.precisionhawk.com/ 
9 https://ardupilot.org/planner/index.html 
10 https://www.dronedeploy.com/product/mobile/ 
11 https://www.ugcs.com/ 

6 
 
the Agisoft mission planning tool has a power-line detection algorithm, most off-the-shelf flight mission planners 
may cause an accident with adjacent obstacles in the environment and should be used cautiously and at the safe 
fixed distance to the object.  
2.2 Model-free methods 
Model-free methods do not have any prior information for target structures or scenes. Since there is no prior 
information, it is challenging to compute an optimal scanning trajectory. Therefore, model-free methods have to 
find the best scanning trajectory in an online manner from a partially constructed model. This problem is the same 
as the exploration planning problem, which determines the scanning paths online to explore an unknown and 
spatially bounded space. In this problem, a scanning platform has to estimate its location and construct 3D models 
in real-time. The location can be estimated using the simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) method 
(Leonard and Durrant-Whyte, 1991), and sparse 3D models can be constructed using an environmental mapping 
method (Estrada et al., 2005). SLAM systems are used to define the poses of the platforms, capture data from the 
scene, and direct the platform to the defined positions. Still, before directing the platform, the pose of the next 
station must be determined. In the last two decades, many SLAM approaches used a probabilistic method for 
reducing the impact of the inaccurate sensor on the map, using millimeter waves for building relative maps 
(Dissanayake et al., 2001), integrating Particle Filter and Extended Kalman Filter (Montemerlo et al., 2002), or 
introducing Square Root Smoothing and Mapping (Dellaert and Kaess, 2006). Another SLAM system is Visual 
SLAM which can produce a fast 3D reconstruction on-the-fly (Fang and Zhan, 2020).  
Most model-free methods employ the next-best-view (NBV) approach. This approach is a greedy method 
that finds a local solution from partial information. It consistently determines the best viewpoint that obtains the 
largest unknown information from a current map. The unknown information is defined according to the purpose 
of various scanning scenarios. Some methods (Batinovic et al., 2021; Cieslewski et al., 2017) try to explore a 
volumetric map within a minimum time thoroughly. They evaluate the unknown volumes to determine an NBV 
in the volumetric map. Some methods (Bircher et al., 2018; Song et al., 2020a) are trying to inspect all surfaces 
of an unknown structure. These methods find a viewpoint that observes the largest uncovered surfaces. The other 
methods (Hardouin et al., 2020; Kompis et al., 2021; Song and Jo, 2018) try to reconstruct precise 3D models of 
target structures or environments. These methods analyze the reconstruction quality of 3D models, such as 
completeness and accuracy (Knapitsch et al., 2017). This section classified the model-free methods into three 
categories: frontier-based planning, volumetric-based planning, and surface-based planning. The following 
sections present literature reviews on each category of model-free planning methods summarized in Table 1. 
2.2.1 Frontier-based methods 
Frontier-based planning is one of the most widely used mobile robot exploration methods. The main idea was 
originally proposed by Yamauchi (Yamauchi, 1997), who defined the frontier as a boundary between an explored 
and unexplored area in a 2D occupancy grid map (Moravec and Elfes, 1985). The occupancy grid map represents 
a 2D environment as a set of grid cells composed of three states: free, occupied, and unknown. The frontier cells 
are estimated by collecting free cells adjacent to unknown cells. The frontier-based method starts at an initial 
location with an initially scanned map. The method continuously moves toward the nearest accessible and 
unvisited frontier cell until entire unknown cells are explored. This method generally shows acceptable 
exploration performances while intuitive and straightforward. Umari and Mukhopadhyay (2017) extended the 
frontier-based method to detect the frontiers in the occupancy grid map efficiently. They found frontiers by 
expanding multiple rapidly-exploring random trees (RRTs) instead of classical image processing methods like 
edge detection. The RRTs expanded towards unexplored regions based on the Voronoi diagram; they quickly 
extracted the frontiers with navigation paths. 
The frontier-based method has been extended to 3D exploration tasks of a UAV by utilizing a 3D volumetric 
map (Hornung et al., 2013) instead of a 2D occupancy grid map. Frontier volumes are defined as the free volumes 
adjacent to the unknown volume in volumetric maps. The octree structures can rapidly access the 6- or 18- adjacent 
volumes. Most methods iteratively determine the NBVs based on the frontier information. Oßwald et al. (2016) 
improved the exploration performance of the general frontier-based method by providing additional guide 
information on global routes. They utilized a user-provided topological graph representing the topology 
information of the environment. A global route is computed by finding a traveling salesperson problem (TSP) 
solution on the topological graph. A mobile robot sequentially visits every node based on the TSP tour while 

7 
 
exploring local regions using the frontier-based method. This method can produce more effective exploration 
paths that prevent revisiting a region that has already been passed. Cieslewski et al. (2017) extended the frontier-
based method to maintain the maximum speed of a mobile robot. They determined an NBV by selecting target 
frontier volumes inside the current field of view (FoV). This method can prevent a mobile robot from slowing 
down due to heading rotation; therefore, the robot can explore unknown regions at high speed. This method 
reduces the exploration time while it may increase the trajectory length.  
Several studies (Batinovic et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2020) have focused on reducing the computation time of 
frontier extraction and clustering. Dai et al. (2020) proposed an implicit frontier clustering method. They updated 
the frontiers only in the volumes inside the camera frustum at every depth integration step. Batinovic et al. (2021) 
tried to filter out many frontier points in multi-resolution volumes on Octomap. They also applied the mean-shift 
clustering for frontier clustering. These approaches significantly reduce the number of frontiers, which reduces 
the computation time of candidate viewpoint evaluation. 
Some others (Meng et al., 2017; Shade and Newman, 2011) have tried to determine the next-best trajectories 
instead of the NBVs. They evaluated view sequences and found the most informative view paths. Shade and 
Newman (2011) proposed a 3D exploration method for stereo-camera-based scanning. They first extracted frontier 
volumes in a volumetric map and composed 3D vector fields toward the frontier volumes. They then computed 
the steepest descent path in the vector fields to get the next-best trajectory for 3D scanning. Meng et al. (2017) 
proposed a two-stage planning method for 3D exploration. The method first generates frontier sets by clustering 
adjacent frontiers and then computes the coverage path to cover all frontier sets. The coverage path can be 
computed by solving a fixed start open TSP. A mobile robot moves to the first edge of the coverage path and 
continuously recomputes the coverage path. Since this method considers global coverage instead of a single 
viewpoint, the number of revisits of the same area can be reduced. 
2.2.2 Volumetric-based planning 
Volumetric-based planning focuses on reconstructing a complete volumetric model instead of a fast 
exploration of unknown areas. Unlike frontier-based planning, volumetric-based planning analyzes not only the 
frontier but also the entire spatial information of the volumetric map. Estimated 3D information is sequentially 
integrated into an octree structure (Hornung et al., 2013). Each volume has one of three states (free, occupied, or 
unknown volume), updated based on the occupancy probability. The volumetric map is very suitable for view 
planning since it can easily access entire spatial information by the multi-resolution representation of Octomap. 
Furthermore, it can efficiently perform a ray-casting for visibility check. This operation is essential for viewpoint 
evaluation. 
Volumetric-based planning method has also been widely used in object modeling. Vasquez-Gomez et al. 
(2017) proposed a volumetric-based planning method for single object modeling. They evaluated viewpoints by 
analyzing unknown volumes with overlapped volumes for point cloud registration. They also applied a 
hierarchical ray-tracing method for fast visibility check. This method starts from the rough-resolution map and 
applies high-resolution ray-tracing only around occupied volumes. Delmerico et al. (2018) proposed several 
information gain functions for viewpoint evaluation on the volumetric model. To quantify the visible information, 
they just counted unobserved voxels or calculated a weighting sum of voxel entropy. The authors also considered 
the object’s rear side voxels with their entropy. They evaluated the performances of the proposed information gain 
functions through various modeling scenarios. Daudelin and Campbell (2017) proposed a view planning method 
for modeling an object without any prior information such as size or bounding box. They dynamically extended 
search spaces for the sampling of viewpoints based on a partial reconstruction. The search spaces are not restricted 
to known free space. They estimated all reachable configurations of a mobile robot’s sensor and generated 
viewpoint samples from the reachable configurations. Similar to (Delmerico et al., 2018), the total amount of 
information gain for each candidate viewpoint is computed. 
Several studies also proposed a volumetric-based planning method for exploration tasks. Bircher et al. (2016) 
employed a receding horizon planning strategy for exploration planning. The strategy iteratively computes an 
optimal exploration path and only executes the first step of the optimal path. This method generates a set of 
viewpoints by expanding an RRT and selects the best branch that provides the maximum information gain. The 
information gain is defined as the total volume of visible unknown cells penalized by the distance costs of nodes. 
The method then determines the NBV to the first node of the branch. This approach can efficiently find exploration 
paths with a low-computation complexity even in large-size environments. Papachristos et al. (2019b) extended 

8 
 
the receding horizon planning method (Bircher et al., 2016) to additionally consider the localization uncertainty 
in exploration tasks. The proposed method comprises two planning stages: volumetric exploration planning and 
uncertainty-optimization planning. Like the receding horizon planning, the exploration planning expands branches 
of a random tree and determines an NBV from the first node of the most informative branch. To compute an 
information gain, they consider not only unknown volumes but also the occupancy probability of occupied 
volumes. The uncertainty-optimization planning then finds an optimal trajectory to the NBV, which provides the 
minimum localization uncertainty for the SLAM module. Dharmadhikari et al. (2020) also extended the receding 
horizon planning to provide fast and agile paths for a MAV. They directly generated view configurations and 
admissible paths based on motion primitives. They then determined a future-safe path that provides the maximum 
information gain and guarantees continuous fast motions. Batinovic et al. (2022) proposed an exploration planning 
method for LiDAR scanning data. They applied a recursive shadow-casting algorithm for fast information gain 
computation of large-scale point clouds. They also proposed a cuboid-based path evaluation method that estimates 
the information gain of each RRT edge instead of a node. 
Song and Jo (2017) applied an inspection approach to a model-free planning method. Given a prior model of 
a target structure, the inspection approach precomputes a coverage path that provides full visual coverage of the 
whole surfaces of the prior model. On the other hand, Song and Jo (2017) addressed an online inspection planning 
on an incrementally updated and partially known model. The inspection planning method first determines an NBV 
that explores the largest unknown area in a volumetric map. Similar to (Bircher et al., 2016), it expands branches 
of RRT and evaluates the information gain of each branch to determine the NBV. The method then plans a local 
inspection path to the NBV, providing complete visual coverage of near-frontiers. The local inspection path is 
continuously replanned according to the updated near-frontiers until a robot reaches the NBV. This method 
improves the completeness of volumetric modeling because it can thoroughly scan all small unreconstructed 
regions. Song et al. (2020a) also extended the online inspection planning to consider global coverage planning. 
They proposed an online map partitioning method, which decomposes entire space into a set of sectors by 
clustering free and unknown volumes. The decomposed sectors have a compact and convex shape; therefore, the 
sectors represent a topological map. The method plans a global coverage path of unexplored sectors and 
determines an NBV to move toward the next sector. It then plans a local inspection path that fully covers local 
frontiers. This method significantly reduces total exploration time and path length by reducing the number of 
revisits of the sectors. 
2.2.3 Surface-based planning 
Surface-based planning concentrates on reconstructing a precise 3D surface model, which is represented as 
surface meshes (Kazhdan and Hoppe, 2013), surfel points (Whelan et al., 2016), or truncated signed distance 
function (TSDF) (Newcombe et al., 2011). Volumetric models are difficult to sufficiently express complex surface 
information; therefore, the surface-based planning methods analyze the shape and trend of reconstructed surfaces 
instead of volume information. Most surface-based planning methods have been used to reconstruct small-scale 
objects. Chen and Li (2005) predicted the shape and trend of simple and smooth surfaces from the curvature 
tendency and determined an NBV based on the predicted surface information. Wu Shihao et al. (2014) also 
predicted a tentative surface model from a partial reconstruction by using the Poisson surface reconstruction 
algorithm (Kazhdan and Hoppe, 2013). They then evaluated the completeness and smoothness of Poisson iso-
surfaces to determine an NBV. Lee et al. (2020) detected surface shapes with surface primitives such as planes, 
cylinders, and spheres and utilized them for NBV determination. 
Recently, several studies have attempted to apply the surface-based planning method to large-scale modeling 
tasks. Hardouin et al. (2020) analyzed the reconstructed surfaces to determine an NBV for MAV exploration. 
They estimated 3D data using a stereo camera or RGB-D sensor and integrated them into a surface model based 
on the TSDF (Newcombe et al., 2011). TSDF can reconstruct detailed 3D surfaces in real-time from a volumetric 
distance field, which contains sign distances to the closest surface. TSDF is also useful for identifying missing 
model parts during an online reconstruction (Monica and Aleotti, 2018). To determine an NBV, Hardouin et al. 
(2020) first detected incomplete surface elements (ISEs) from TSDF and then generated viewpoints along with 
normal directions of ISEs at a specified distance. They clustered the neighboring viewpoints and selected a cluster 
covering the most ISEs. They incrementally updated the TSDF model by scanning from an NBV until no ISE was 
detected. 

9 
 
Song and Jo (2018) proposed a surface-based exploration, which is an extended method of online inspection 
planning (Song and Jo, 2017) for surface model reconstruction. The surface-based exploration analyzes both the 
volumetric map and surface model in TSDF for fast exploration and complete reconstruction. The method 
determined an NBV that explores the largest unknown areas in the volumetric map. The method then plans an 
inspection path covering the surrounding low-confidence surfaces and frontiers. To cover the low-confidence 
surfaces, it generates a viewpoint set for each surface by inversely composing a view frustum from a surface to 
its normal direction. An inspection path is computed by finding the minimum distance trajectory that visits at least 
one viewpoint from each viewpoint set. A generalized TSP algorithm can compute the minimum distance 
trajectory. The method then refines the inspection path to cover the near-frontiers by applying the inspection 
planning method of Song and Jo (Song and Jo, 2017). Their method has a longer path length and more completion 
time, but the percentage of the coverage and the quality of the model are improved in their method. However, 
using a better objective function could improve the quality of the 3D reconstruction. 
Schmid et al. (2020) proposed an exploration planning method for reconstructing a surface model. They 
implemented a new RRT method, which continuously expands a single tree to get global coverage with the 
maximum utility. Unlike the original RRT method, it rewires tree nodes according to their utility to maintain non-
executed nodes and sub-trees. The method then refines intermediate paths and computes a global coverage path 
that maximizes the utility. They also proposed an information gain function for TSDF-based surface models. It 
considers not only a TSDF weight but also a sensing error. The sensing error of the depth sensor is modeled as 
the quadratic weight of the depth range. In their experiments, the proposed method can reconstruct more accurate 
3D models than the other surface-based planning methods such as (Yoder and Scherer, 2016) and (Song and Jo, 
2018). 
A new informed sampling method for exploration path planning is introduced in (Kompis et al., 2021). The 
informed sampling method ranks the sampled viewpoints based on a utility function and finds the viewpoint 
candidates that are likely to have high information gain in advance. They used a stereo camera for 3D mapping 
the environment and Voxblox (Oleynikova et al., 2017) as the map representation of the scene. They generated 
viewpoints based on surface normal and frontier voxels’ normal and computed their ranks according to an artificial 
potential field. The artificial potential field considers MAV position and viewpoint’s distinction and 
repetitiveness. The method then evaluated only a subset of viewpoints according to the ranks. This approach 
significantly reduces the computation time of viewpoint evaluation. 
Song et al. (2020b) applied a surface-based planning method to online multi-view stereo (MVS) 
reconstruction for the first time. On the other hand, Song et al. (2020b) implemented an online MVS system that 
reconstructs a large-scale scene in real-time. The system computes camera poses from the key-frame-based SLAM 
(Mur-Artal et al., 2015) and estimates depth maps of key-frames by performing the stereo matching of neighboring 
key-frames. For the depth estimation, it utilizes a monocular mapping algorithm, REMODE (Pizzoli et al., 2014). 
The estimated depth maps are integrated into a single 3D model based on the surfel mapping method (Whelan et 
al., 2016). They utilized the surface-based exploration method to plan a local inspection path for scanning low-
confidence surfaces. Trajectory optimization is applied to maximize the MVS performance. They considered 
several multi-view stereo heuristics for the trajectory optimization, such as parallax, relative distance, and focus 
angle. Furthermore, Song et al., (2021a) extended this work for a more precise 3D model reconstruction. They 
utilized the deep-learning-based MVS, CasMVSNet (Gu et al., 2020), instead of REMODE (Pizzoli et al., 2014) 
for depth computation. CasMVSNet estimates a depth map by using multiple small cost volumes. It progressively 
reduces the depth hypothesis range in a coarse-to-fine manner, making it possible to process a high-resolution 
image in real-time. CasMVSNet provides better reconstruction performances with respect to accuracy and 
completeness than REMODE. 
Surface-based planning analyzes detailed reconstructed surfaces in a surface model; however, the surface 
model may require a lot of memory. In this case, it can be limited to implementing the 3D scanning system 
onboard. To address this problem, a coarse surface model can be utilized for path planning by lowering the 
resolution of the reconstructed model. However, the advantage of surface-based planning that analyzes the surface 
shape and trend of a precise 3D model is lost. Finding a way to efficiently handle large-scale 3D data for an 
onboard system would be an interesting direction for future work. Table 1 Summarizes the state-of-the-art model-
free approaches. 

10 
 
Table 1: Categorization and main features of model-free view-path planning methods 
Category 
Approach 
References 
Modeling 
Method 
Modeling Target 
Description 
Frontier-based 
planning 
NBV planning 
(Yamauchi, 1997), 
(Umari and Mukhopadhyay, 2017) 
2D occupancy 
grid mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
Continuously move toward the nearest frontier in 
2D grid map 
(Zhu et al., 2018) 
2D occupancy 
grid mapping 
Indoor  
Deep reinforcement learning-based exploration 
planning 
(Oßwald et al., 2016), 
(Cieslewski et al., 2017) 
Volumetric 
mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
Continuously move toward the nearest frontier in 
3D space 
(Dai et al., 2020), 
(Batinovic et al., 2021) 
Volumetric 
mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
Reduce the computation time of frontier extraction 
and clustering 
Next-best trajectory 
(Shade and Newman, 2011), 
(Meng et al., 2017) 
Volumetric 
mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
Evaluate view sequences and determine the best 
trajectory 
Volumetric-based 
planning 
NBV planning 
(Vasquez-Gomez et al., 2017), 
(Delmerico et al., 2018), 
(Daudelin and Campbell, 2017) 
Volumetric 
mapping 
Small-scale object 
Provide various evaluation metrics for NBV 
planning on volumetric model 
(Hepp et al., 2018a) 
Volumetric 
mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
3D CNN-based viewpoint evaluation for NBV 
planning 
Next-best trajectory 
(Charrow et al., 2015a), 
(Charrow et al., 2015b), 
(Wang et al., 2020)  
Volumetric 
mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
Evaluate or optimize view paths by using an 
information-theoretic measure 
Receding horizon 
planning 
(Bircher et al., 2016) 
(Papachristos et al., 2019b), 
(Dharmadhikari et al., 2020), 
(Batinovic et al., 2022) 
Volumetric 
mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
Iteratively computes a next-best trajectory and only 
execute the first step of the trajectory 
Inspection planning 
(Heng et al., 2015), 
(Song and Jo, 2017), 
(Song et al., 2020a) 
Volumetric 
mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
Online inspection path planning for complete 
modeling 
Surface-based 
planning 
NBV planning 
(Chen and Li, 2005), 
(Wu et al., 2014), 
(Lee et al., 2020) 
Surface 
reconstruction 
Small-scale object 
Surface-based NBV planning for modeling a small-
scale object 
(Hardouin et al., 2020), 
(Kompis et al., 2021) 
TSDF 
mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
Evaluate reconstruction quality for NBV planning 
(Peralta et al., 2020), 
(Zeng et al., 2020) 
Point cloud 
mapping 
Single object 
Machine-learning-based NBV planning for point-
cloud mapping 
Receding horizon 
planning 
(Schmid et al., 2020) 
TSDF 
mapping 
Indoor/outdoor  
Iteratively rewire nodes of RRT for coverage 
planning 
Inspection planning 
(Song and Jo, 2018) 
TSDF 
mapping 
Outdoor  
Online inspection planning for dense surface 
reconstruction 
(Song et al., 2020b), 
(Song et al., 2021) 
MVS 
Outdoor  
View path planning via online multi-view stereo 
reconstruction 

11 
 
2.3 Model-based methods 
Model-based methods leverage a coarse representation of the scene geometry (geometric proxy) for 
generating optimal viewpoint and path planning. Recently, Agisoft Metashape 1.5 introduced functionality for 
designing an optimum path-planning for image capturing, which creates mission plans based on the rough model 
(Agisoft, 2022; Zhang et al., 2020). In this approach, a set of viewpoints with sufficient overlap is generated to 
cover the surface of the object. However, the computed static network of camera poses cannot promise the 
completeness of the dataset in real-world situations, and the accuracy of the final point cloud is not considered 
explicitly. Recently explore-then-exploit methods (Figure 2) which consist of two phases are utilized in UAV 
mission planning (Peng and Isler, 2019; Roberts et al., 2017; Yan et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020). The first phase 
is the exploration that generates the initial viewpoints and flight path similar to off-the-shelf flight planners or 
manual flight (Koch et al., 2019). The second phase is called the exploitation phase, where the geometric proxy 
is employed to design optimum viewpoints and trajectories to acquire proper images for 3D reconstruction 
(Sadeghi et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020b). 
Figure 2: Overall structure of explore-then-exploit methods 
The main advantage of the explore-then-exploit strategy is that prior knowledge of the scene geometry 
facilitates the global optimization of 3D coverage and accuracy in the secondary exploitation visit (Peng and Isler, 
2019). 
2.3.1 Exploration 
Although most researchers use a nadir flight for this phase, employing orbit patterns is also reported in some 
literature (Roberts et al., 2017). The outcome of exploration phase approximates the scene geometry which is 
called “geometric proxy”. The geometric proxy is usually a mesh (Hoppe et al., 2012; Sharma et al., 2019), point 
cloud (Yan et al., 2021), or supported by voxel representation (Hepp et al., 2018b). The initial model or geometric 
proxy obtained by exploration, may include many gaps or inaccurate areas (Hepp et al., 2018b; Koch et al., 2019). 
Therefore, this rough 3D representation of the scene is mostly used for optimal viewpoint planning (to generate a 
high-fidelity reconstruction) as well as computing the 3D safe navigable zone for the platform (Hepp et al., 2018b; 
Roberts et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2018). However, (Yan et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020) used this geometric proxy 
to locate incomplete or low-quality areas to guide the camera placement in the exploration phase.  
Different from most other approaches, which use an exploratory flight for generating geometric proxy, in 
(Zhou et al., 2020a), a very coarse 2.5D coarse model is generated from the Google map (providing 2D footprints 
of buildings) and a single satellite image (for height estimation based on shadows).  
Using this approach, the planning can be done before visiting the target sites. However, it needs an up-to-date 
satellite image captured during a sunny day and assumes that the ground is relatively flat. Moreover, extrusion of 
the 2D footprint of irregularly shaped architectural objects leads to a non-optimal viewpoint planning in the 
exploration phase. 
 

12 
 
 
Figure 3: comparison of proxies. First row: coarse 2.D proxies generated in (Zhou et al., 2020a); Second row: 3D proxies generated using 
an exploratory flight. Images are adopted from (Zhou et al., 2020a) 
A semantic-aware exploit-and-explore flight planning approach is introduced in (Koch et al., 2019). The main 
contribution of this research lies at employing semantic information of the exploratory flight for extracting the 
target object and generating a semantically-enriched coarse proxy for defining inadmissible airspaces for safe 
trajectories. A fully Convolutional Network (Long et al., 2015) is applied on 3069 images (from Semantic Drone 
Dataset12 and ISPRS 2D Semantic Labelling Benchmark (Rottensteiner et al., 2014) and also some manually 
annotated UAV images). The open street map (OSM) information are used to improve the results. The object of 
interest is extracted using a region growing seeded by the user input, which is applied on the segmentation result. 
The semantics of the environment is very important (both practically and legally) in defining the flight trajectory, 
especially in dense urban areas. 
It is worth mentioning that with the recent advancements in the concepts and realization of BIM, digital twin, 
and smart cities, the 3D rough models of large structures like buildings and bridges are going to be more available. 
Although this 3D spatial information can alleviate the exploration in UAV mission planning, semantic and 
geometric information of the whole scene should be updated for a safe UAV mission and high-fidelity 3D 
reconstruction. 
2.3.2 Exploitation 
After generating the geometric proxy, exploitation aims at designing optimum viewpoints and trajectories to 
provide the data for high-quality 3D reconstruction (Sadeghi et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020b) constrained by 
platform and environment conditions. 
(Hoppe et al., 2012) proposed an uncertainty-aware and heuristic-based viewpoint planning approach which 
aims at accurate 3D coverage of the scene. Their approach belongs to the generate-and-test approaches which 
generates potential camera poses by assigning one fronto-parallel view to each triangle of the proxy-mesh. Then 
an angular histogram (four bins in [0-40]) is computed for each triangle. Another histogram which is the 
accumulation of cameras of all triangles for each angular bin is used to score the cameras. Based on camera scores 
(which are updated after the selection of each viewpoint), a greedy selection of the best (i.e. observes the most 
triangles at a novel angle) overlapping neighboring viewpoints is employed in order to select a subset of the 
viewpoints to reach one of the two stopping conditions for each (in practice 95% ) of the triangles: 1) estimated 
accuracy, measured by the largest semi-axis of the covariance ellipsoid, is acceptable, or 2) at least one camera of 
each bin is selected. Although the efficiency of this approach is not reported, we believe that initializing the camera 
positions by considering one candidate for each triangle of the proxy mesh may generate a very dense search space 
and is not applicable in real-world large-scale projects. Since this is an off-line approach, no feedback about 
texture or illumination conditions is considered during data capturing. 
Jing et al. (2016) subdivided the 3D rough model using the Bubble Mesh method. The initial model is divided 
into small patches. Afterward, randomly sampled viewpoints are generated around the target building. After 
                                                          
12 https://www.tugraz.at/index.php?id=22387 

13 
 
investigating the visibility (between each surface patch and each viewpoint) and adjacency (between each pair of 
viewpoints), the selection of viewpoints is performed as a modified set covering with constraints using a 
neighborhood greedy search algorithm. SFM and MVS heuristics are not involved in the viewpoint selection and 
computing the orientation of the cameras and quantitative evaluation of the results are missing. Although the 
proposed method for designing image orientations seems feasible, generating random positions is too risky, and 
it might cause some gaps or low-quality areas on complex objects. 
In the seminal research of (Roberts et al., 2017), selecting the viewpoint and trajectory planning are jointly 
considered in a unified global optimization problem as a submodular orienteering problem. This innovative 
approach finds a path that maximizes scene coverage while adhering to the SFM and MVS heuristics and 
respecting the limited travel-budget of the drone. After introducing a coverage model, the approximated optimal 
orientations of all candidate cameras are computed. Submodular orienteering is then transformed into an additive 
orienteering problem which is solved as an integer linear problem. However, the coverage model of this approach 
is monotone which means selecting more cameras never reduces the coverage score, which is not in line with the 
findings of (Hepp, 2018; Seitz et al., 2006). Moreover, there is no stopping condition except travel-budget, which 
is independent of the complexity of the object and desired quality. Lacking online processing also prevents 
reaction to low-texture areas and moving objects during flight. Lastly, uniform sampling of the object points 
avoids putting more attention on the edges. 
Hepp et al., (2018b) proposed a system for 3D reconstruction of building-scale scenes which is similar to 
Roberts2017 in spirit. Based on the coarse mesh (generated from images with overhead pattern), a volumetric 
occupancy map (fixed voxel size=0.2m) containing occupied, free-space, and unobserved voxels is generated 
where each voxel is also attributed by a measure of observation quality. The authors introduced an approximated 
camera model (to make the optimization problem suitable for a submodular formulation) to measure expected 
information gain from an individual viewpoint, independently from other viewpoints. After generating viewpoints 
candidates, ray-casting is used to compute the visible voxels for each viewpoint to evaluate the corresponding 
contributed information. Since this model entirely ignores the MVS heuristics, the proposed method encourages 
fronto-parallel views during the computation of information contribution of voxels. To solve the submodular 
optimization with travel-budget constraint, an adaption of the recursive strategy which is introduced in (Chekuri 
and Pál, 2005) is used. This strategy recursively splits the trajectory and travel-budget into two parts and selects 
the reachable (with the current travel budget) viewpoint with the highest information gain. The authors employed 
voxels’ attributes (free, occupied, unknown) to find the free-space motion paths. Paths between viewpoints are 
preferably a straight line, or in case of an obstacle they are piecewise linear computed using RRT* algorithm 
(Karaman and Frazzoli, 2011). In spite of very promising results, this approach uses images from the exploratory 
flight in reconstruction and also in uncertainty computation. This would lead to a problem when the geometric 
proxy is not generated from the exploratory flight (cf. section 2.3.1). Even if a good geometric proxy is available, 
the exploration should start after an initial flight. Another issue of these methods is that their optimization needs 
the minimum number of viewpoints as input and is not guaranteed to converge. The user should decide how long 
to run the optimization. Furthermore, using a recursive greedy algorithm to maximize the optimization objective 
may lead to some viewpoints which cannot make a single adjustable block. Hence, some other images are added 
to make sure that all the images are connected. (Hoppe et al., 2012; Mostegel et al., 2016) solve this problem by 
applying an overlapping constraint in the recursive selection process. 
An Explore-then-exploit approach is introduced in (Peng and Isler, 2019) which after exploration and 
generating the geometric proxy, builds a set of adaptive viewing planes for viewpoint selection. This is an iterative 
approach in the exploration phase (usually one exploratory flight and two exploitation flights) which repeats data 
capturing after identifying the low-quality regions until quality converges or a desired level of quality is achieved. 
The main novelty of this approach which is an extension of their previous study (Peng and Isler, 2018), is 
considering a set of adaptive viewing planes (Figure 4) to limit the search space for camera placement leading to 
similar resolution for the images in each patch. However, generating viewing planes based on the slope of regions 
may cause gaps because viewing planes are created based on the average of patch points normal. Hence, in the 
complex regions the viewing plane might not be able to cover all regions, properly. 

14 
 
Figure 4: The adaptive viewing rectangles for different clusters of the scene patch (Peng and Isler, 2019) 
In (Smith et al., 2018) a dilation operator with a ball structure element (whose radius is the desired minimum 
distance) is applied on the geometric proxy to estimate a closed surface boundary between safe and potentially 
dangerous airspace. The authors employed some reconstructability heuristics for predicting reconstruction quality. 
The contradicting effect of parallax on triangulation error and matchability are estimated and considered. 
Moreover, the distance of the camera to the object and binary visibility of the points based on the geometric scene 
proxy and the deviation from normal of the surface are also elaborated in the heuristic function. The authors use 
the geometric proxy to initialize the camera network with a fixed number of uniformly distributed cameras. 
Utilizing a set of uniformly distributed samples on the geometric proxy, pairwise view parameters are improved 
incrementally using the simplex method to optimize the reconstructability of the samples. Different aspects of 3D 
reconstruction heuristics are formulated and embedded very well in the objective function of this approach. 
However, since fixed and uniformly distributed sample points are used, depth discontinuities posed some 
problems in the experiments. Moreover, the inability of this off-line approach to adapt the number of views could 
be improved to avoid oversampling and undersampling of the viewpoints. Furthermore, like almost all other 
approaches, varying surface texture and lighting are not considered in their approach.  
Sharma et al. (2019) introduced a floor-wise viewpoint and path planning for optimal building surface 
coverage. The geometric proxy is a mesh which could be obtained either from building blueprints or cross-sections 
of a rough model generated by a reconnaissance (exploratory) flight. For each height a contour is generated and 
minimum 60% overlap between image strips is considered to cover the contours in 3D. Offsetting the contours by 
a fixed distance, a 2D flight map is generated. This initial flight path could be updated to avoid obstacles which 
are computed with MVS reconstruction from the reconnaissance flight. The camera positions are initialized by 
sampling the flight path every 1 m and camera poses (position and orientations) are then optimized using genetic 
algorithm to maximize the total coverage such that at least N (=3) cameras see each patch of the surfaces. Since 
this approach does not consider most MVS heuristics, the generated 3D model is suitable for the applications like 
VR which the details and completeness of the dataset are more important than the accuracy of 3D reconstruction.  
In (Yan et al., 2021), by evaluating the quality of the geometric proxy (point cloud), two types of new 
viewpoints are selected in a constrained view sampling space. The new viewpoints of first type are considered for 
improving incomplete or low-quality areas and the second type viewpoints are added to fully cover the entire 
scene. Finally, various optimization algorithms are employed to generate a smooth 3D trajectory. For this step, 
ACO, PSO, and Branch and Bound (BnB) methods are compared and the best results are reported using ACO. 
Similar to (Smith et al., 2018) the sample points on the geometric proxy are distributed uniformly. Therefore, 
most sample points with lower quality scores were located at the edges of buildings or structures with more 
geometric details. Two main objectives in their method are maximizing the coverage and minimizing the path 
length, so the quality of the 3D reconstruction does not play any role in their method for viewpoint planning.  
(Kuang et al., 2020) proposed an on-line path planning method for large-scale urban scene reconstruction. In 
this research the geometric proxy of the buildings is generated using an oblique initial flight around the buildings. 
Then, instances in the scene are segmented using the well-known Mask-RCNN (He et al., 2017) approach and 
simple geometric shapes are used to represent the layout of the scene. Flight trajectory is minimized in two levels, 
namely inter-buildings and intra-building levels. In the first level of optimization each building is considered as a 
node of a graph (Figure 5) and the shortest path is computed using the classical Dijkstra algorithm. In the second 
level, the task is formulated as the Chinese postman problem. 
 

15 
 
Figure 5: Bi-level graph-based path planning in (Kuang et al., 2020) 
For on-the-fly predicting the coverage of the whole scene a lightweight SLAM framework is utilized. Then, 
unobserved spaces are covered by adding new viewpoints. If the endurance of UAV allows, this online approach 
also has a mechanism which tries to capture close-up images of architectural details. The main limitation of this 
approach is that SFM and MSV heuristics are not considered in the planning, directly. Moreover, since prior 
information of the coarse scene model is not completely used during flight, more viewpoints are required. 
(Huang et al., 2018) proposed an efficient viewpoint and path planning method based on a fast MVS and 
NBV algorithm. This approach consists of an online front-end for viewpoint and path planning to control the 
image capturing process and offline back-end for generating the final dense 3D model (Figure 6). The online 
front-end incorporates a closed-loop for iterative updating the initial model, coverage evaluation and NBV 
planning to achieve satisfactory coverage. 
Figure 6: The pipeline of the proposed approach in (Huang et al., 2018). Image courtesy: (Huang et al., 2018) 
The proposed approach uses the initial model generated from an enclosing rectangular flight around the 
object. A confidence score is computed for each triangle of the mesh. In this confidence score position consistency, 
normal consistency, and front parallelism are considered. Searching for NBVs is done plane by plane, from high 
to low altitude to speed up the process by coarsening the search space from 5D to 4D. In each iteration, an obstacle-
aware A* algorithm is used for optimal path planning, which connects the NBVs starting from UAV’s current 
position. The main novelty of this approach is using on-the-fly incremental SFM for local and per-vertex updating 
the mesh model. However, it highly relies on GNSS signal availability which is not always the case, especially in 
dense urban areas and close to the large objects. 
Koch et al. (2019) proposed a semantic-aware exploit-and-explore flight planning approach to define 
inadmissible airspaces for safe trajectories. The main contribution of this research lies in employing semantic 
information of the exploratory flight for extracting the target object and generating a semantically-enriched coarse 
proxy for defining free and occupied airspace and avoiding prohibited flight zones. After sampling a large number 
of viewpoints on the bounding box of the extracted object of interest, the normalized distance-weighted mean of 
all visible 3D points is utilized to compute the orientation of each viewpoint candidate. Distance-based and 
observation angle-based gains coupled with camera constellation hemisphere slices on each object point are used 
as heuristics to predict the suitability of the viewpoints for the reconstruction. Inspired by (Hepp et al., 2018b; 
Roberts et al., 2017), greedy submodularity optimization is utilized to add the viewpoint with the highest additive 
information reward to the output set. 
Table 2 summarizes the main characteristics of discussed model-based approach. 
 

16 
 
Table 2: Main characteristics of discussed model-based approach. 
  
Exploration 
Exploitation 
Path planning 
  
On-line 
processing 
  
pose candidate generation 
pose computation  
  
position 
angles 
(Hoppe et al., 2012) 
Nadir flight 
Centers of mesh 
triangles 
Fronto-parallel to 
the mesh normals 
Cluster then select 
Greedy shortest 
path 
No 
(Huang et al., 2018) 
Flight on an 
enclosing rectangle 
Plane-wise 2D grid  
Regular sampling 
of pitch and yaw 
NBV based on confidence score (function of 
position consistency, normal consistency, and 
front parallelism.) 
A* 
Yes 
(Jing et al., 2016) 
2D map and 
estimated building 
height 
Random 
Surface patch 
attraction forces 
 coverage ratio and fully connected 
viewpoints constraints 
No 
No 
(Peng and Isler, 2019) 
Nadir flight  
viewing grid on each 
adaptive viewing 
plane 
Normals of the 
adaptive viewing 
planes 
SfM and MVS heuristics 
patch-wise TSP 
No 
(Roberts et al., 2017) 
Orbit flight 
uniform sampling on 
3D bounding box 
Constrained 
uniform sampling 
Based on the optimum path length 
No 
(Smith et al., 2018) 
Nadir flight 
Uniformly distributed 
views 
Randomly oriented 
simplices around 
each view candidate 
Simplex optimization 
spherical visibility histograms 
TSP 
No 
(Yan et al., 2021) 
Nadir flight 
centers of view 
sampling voxels 
Normal angle of 
sample points 
Local (confidence score (visibility, distance, 
sample points normal)) and Global (coverage) 
TSP-ACO, PSO, 
BnB  
No 
(Kuang et al., 2020) 
Oblique images 
Looking at center of 
unobserved cells 
cluster 
encourages fronto-
parallel views 
sorted confidence score (function of distance, 
number of views, and front parallelism) 
Dijkstra 
Yes 
(Hepp et al., 2018b) 
Nadir flight 
regular 3D sampling 
Add viewpoint s to 
exploration queue 
Random sampling 
with bias towards 
the interesting area 
Information Gain score and Sparse matching 
RRT* 
No 
(Zhou et al., 2020a) 
GoogleMap+satellite 
image  
one candidate for 
each sampling point 
Fronto-parallel to 
the sampling poin 
MaxMin optimization: minimizing the 
redundancy and maximizing the 
reconstructability 
TSP 
No 
(Koch et al., 2019) 
Nadir flight 
uniform sampling on 
3D bounding box 
Normalized 
distance-weighted 
mean of 3D points 
Submodularity (distance-based and 
observation angle-based reward) 
orienteering 
No 
(Sharma et al., 2019) 
Nadir flight 
uniform sampling on 
height-wise 
boundaries  
encourages fronto-
parallel views 
Genetic algorithm 
Fast marching 
No 

17 
 
Since a prior model of the object is available, model-based methods are able to compute the reasonable poses 
that could be used to create a complete and accurate 3D reconstruction. Employing various objective functions 
which include SfM and MVS heuristics, accuracy and completeness are involved explicitly in selecting optimum 
viewpoints. Most of these approaches use monocular images and tackle the problem of viewpoint and path 
planning separately i.e. after computing the effective viewpoints, path optimization will start to compute an 
efficient solution to approach the computed poses. As Table 2 shows, most model-based methods are offline. An 
interesting direction could be using a fast online SfM and MVS system to enable on-the-fly computations. 
To the best of our knowledge, all model-based approaches use uniform sampling of the proxy for further 
inspections or use a uniform discretization of the environment as 3D representation of the object of interest. 
Investigation of the results of the current approaches reveals that most of the large errors lie at highly curved parts 
and also sharp corners of the objects. We suggest considering an adaptive sampling of the objects where the 
overall density depends on the desired LoD. However, the density should be also adaptive to local curvature which 
leads to more samples on the high curvature areas and geometric boundaries.  
The Static environment is the prerequisite of the most MVS algorithms (Mostegel et al., 2016). Therefore, 
detecting and considering moving objects during data capturing is very important. However, this issue is widely 
ignored by most planning and image acquisition approaches. Another limitation is low-texture areas and building 
parts with different materials. In some cases, especially for buildings, there might be some low-texture images 
that can’t reconstruct the 3D model of the area or object. None of the above-mentioned model-based methods 
consider neither moving objects nor low-texture images for viewpoints planning. 
Although some researchers have already employed Google Map and satellite images for generating geometric 
proxy, with the recent advancements in the concepts and realization of BIM, digital twin and smart cities, the 3D 
rough model of the large structures like buildings and bridges are going to be more available. Even LoD2 
information is publicly available in some countries nowadays1,2 that could be used as a-priori information in 
viewpoint and path planning algorithms.  
3 
Evaluation strategies  
Evaluation of viewpoint and path planning methods for UAV-based 3D reconstruction is a challenging task 
which poses many significant challenges (Debus and Rodehorst, 2021; Hepp et al., 2018b; Koch et al., 2019). 
First, the important criteria in various communities and projects are different. For example, while visual fidelity 
and completeness are important in some cases, accuracy is a key in some other applications. Moreover, in some 
projects and environments, overall flight time is critical. Second, environmental conditions such as lighting, 
weather conditions, and surrounding objects may change. Moreover, moving objects and modifications of the 
object itself that can occur over the course of time can affect the evaluations. Furthermore, ground truth 
information is typically not available (Debus and Rodehorst, 2021; Hepp et al., 2018b; Koch et al., 2019). Hence, 
in most studies, the evaluation of the real datasets and scenes are restricted to the qualitative verification. 
Quantitative evaluations are usually possible and performed on synthetic datasets (cf. section 3.2) or specific 
dataset is used which make the fair and standard comparison of different approaches almost impossible. Last but 
not least, in most evaluations the quality of the generated 3D data (e.g. point cloud) is investigated. This indicates 
the performance of the whole pipeline of planning, data capturing and 3D reconstruction (Figure 7), which is the 
non-separable mixture of these three steps. The interested reader can refer to (Seitz et al., 2006) and the leader-
board of (Knapitsch et al., 2017) for a comparison of the reconstruction approaches. It should be accentuated that 
even in the case of perfect planning, the effect of hardware and environment could affect the quality of the acquired 
images.  
                                                          
1 https://3d.bk.tudelft.nl/opendata/opencities/  
2 https://opengeodata.lgln.niedersachsen.de/#lod2  

18 
 
Figure 7: General pipeline of planning, data capturing and 3D reconstruction 
Therefore, in this section we first mention the quality measures for the whole pipeline and then investigate 
measures that indicate the quality of viewpoint and path planning separately.  
3.1 Evaluation of the whole pipeline: 
Denoting the ground truth as 𝐺 and reconstruction result as 𝑅, we can compute the following quality 
measures:  
• 
precision (how much of 𝑅 is supported by 𝐺) 
• 
recall (how much of 𝐺 is correctly modeled by 𝑅)  
• 
F-score (Harmonic mean of recall and precision) 
• 
accuracy (how close 𝑅 is to 𝐺) 
Generally, both 𝑅 and 𝐺 could be a mesh or point cloud. However, considering 𝑅 as point cloud is better 
(avoiding surface reconstruction and its errors) and more convenient (avoiding sampling mesh at its vertices (Seitz 
et al., 2006)). If 𝐺 is delivered as a mesh or CAD model, it is also better to use it directly to avoid the 
approximations in resampling it to a point cloud. Nevertheless, if 𝐺 is itself a point cloud (e.g. captured by laser 
scanners) we can directly use it in the point-based evaluations. Following the similar notations as in (Knapitsch 
et al., 2017) and (Seitz et al., 2006), the quality measures could be expressed as follows: 
Precision (Correctness): if the distance between a reconstructed point 𝑟∈𝑅 and the ground truth is 
𝑒𝑟→𝐺= min
𝑔∈𝐺‖𝑟−𝑔‖, the precision of the reconstruction for any cut-out distance 𝑑 is defined as follows: 
𝑃(𝑑) =
∑
[𝑒𝑟→𝐺≤𝑑]
𝑟∈𝑅
|𝑅|
 
(1) 
where [⋅] ∈{0,1} is the Iverson bracket and |⋅| is the cardinality of the set and 𝑃(𝑑) ∈[0,1]. Selecting the proper 
value for 𝑑 depends on the application and affects the results. For example, (Hepp et al., 2018b) considered 𝑑=
10 𝑐𝑚 which may not be acceptable for some high quality reconstruction purposes. 
Recall (Completeness): Similarly, for a ground-truth point 𝑔∈𝐺, its distance to 𝑅 is defined as 
𝑒𝑔→𝑅= min
𝑟∈𝑅‖𝑔−𝑟‖ and the recall of the reconstruction 𝑅 for any cut-out distance 𝑑 is 𝑅(𝑑) ∈[0,1] and is 
defined as: 
Planning 
Images 
metadata 
3D representation 
Data capturing 
View point planning 
Path planning 
3D reconstruction 

19 
 
𝑅(𝑑) =
∑
[𝑒𝑔→𝑅≤𝑑]
𝑔∈𝐺
|𝐺|
 
(2) 
F-score: summarizes the precision and recall in a single score as: 
𝐹(𝑑) = 2𝑃(𝑑)𝑅(𝑑)
𝑃(𝑑) + 𝑅(𝑑) 
(3) 
𝐹(𝑑) ∈[0,1] has a very important property that if either 𝑃(𝑑) →0 or 𝑅(𝑑) →0 then 𝐹(𝑑) →0, 
which is not always valid for arithmetic mean. 
Accuracy: Various metrics using unsigned and signed histograms of distances from 𝑅 to 𝐺 could be used to 
measure the accuracy of the reconstruction. While mean and standard deviation of distances could be used (Huang 
et al., 2018), the median of the distances is more robust to outliers. Another statistic which is suggested in the 
literature (Seitz et al., 2006) is the distance 𝐷 such that 𝑋% of the points on R are within distance 𝐷 of G. Median 
is a special case of this measure when 𝑋 = 50. In (Seitz et al., 2006) 𝑋= 90 is used for computing the accuracy. 
The main benefit of using signed distances compared to unsigned distances is that it gives a better sense of 
where and in which directions the reconstructed surface deviates from the ground truth (Maboudi et al., 2018; 
Seitz et al., 2006). To this end, one can visualize the distribution and inspect the trend of the signed deviations. 
Moreover, using unsigned distances changes the distribution of errors. In the case of normally distributed signed 
errors, the unsigned errors follow the folded normal distribution (Tsagris et al., 2014), whose parameters are 
different from the normal distribution’s parameters. 
To the best of our knowledge, there is no established framework for the evaluation of viewpoint planning, 
directly. The most common way is to report one of the metrics mentioned in the previous section as a function of 
the number of images for the 3D reconstruction of the object (Huang et al., 2018; Kuang et al., 2020; Peng and 
Isler, 2019; Smith et al., 2018). However, since these metrics are a function of both viewpoint planning quality 
and 3D reconstruction quality, these strategies cannot evaluate the viewpoint planning separately. The topic of 
establishing an evaluation pipeline and proper quality criteria is discussed in (Debus and Rodehorst, 2021). Based 
on the proposed pipeline, the authors evaluated some 3D UAS flight path planning algorithms. This pipeline 
focuses on pre-planned flight paths that have been computed based on available rough 3D models and is not 
transferable to planning in unseen and unknown environments that need to be explored. 
Path planning quality which aims at minimizing the mission duration is also highly correlated with the number 
and distribution of viewpoints. Therefore, reporting mission duration as a function of measures like recall and 
precision (Kuang et al., 2020) depends also on view planning strategy. However, using the same viewpoints, path 
planning quality could be evaluated by measuring the flight path length and data capturing time. UAV battery 
duration and the speed at which the images can be captured are the main constraints that should be considered in 
path planning (Smith et al., 2018). We summarized the evaluation measures reported in the literature in Table 3. 
For the sake of brevity, just model-based approaches are listed. 
 
 

20 
 
Table 3: Evaluation measures reported in the model-based studies 
 
Geometric measure 
Efficiency measure 
(Hoppe et al., 2012) 
Precision: C2M1 (on synthetic dataset) 
Number of images 
(Huang et al., 2018) 
Recall: C2C2 
Accuracy: C2C (mean and RMSE) 
Flight time, and 
 number of images 
(Peng and Isler, 2019) 
Recall: based on depth images 
Accuracy: Mean and standard deviation of the depth 
Number of images 
(Roberts et al., 2017) 
Recall: C2C 
Accuracy: C2C 
Travel budget (fixed) 
(Smith et al., 2018) 
Recall: C2M (on synthetic dataset) 
Accuracy: C2M (on synthetic dataset) 
Flight time, and 
Flight path length 
(Yan et al., 2021) 
Recall: Voxel occupancy 
Accuracy: C2M (on synthetic dataset)  
Flight time, and 
Flight path length 
(Kuang et al., 2020) 
Recall: C2M (on synthetic dataset) 
Accuracy: C2M (RMSE) 
Flight time, and 
Number of images 
(Hepp et al., 2018b) 
Precision: C2C 
Recall: C2C 
Flight path length and 
Number of images 
(Zhou et al., 2020a) 
Recall: C2M  
Accuracy: C2M 
Flight time, path length 
and Number of images 
(Koch et al., 2019) 
Precision: C2C 
Recall: C2C 
Flight path length and 
Number of images 
(Sharma et al., 2019) 
Accuracy: Hausdorff distance (mean and RMS) 
 
Flight time 
 
There are also some attempts to combine different quality metrics to provide a unified score for both 
viewpoint and path planning steps to make different approaches comparable. In (Debus and Rodehorst, 2021) an 
evaluation pipeline is introduced which employs a normalized score for weighted combination of viewpoint and 
path planning quality as: 
𝑆̂ = Ψ
𝐴
𝐿. 𝑑2 
(4) 
where Ψ is the quality factor of the flight path, 𝐿 is the cost of the flight path length, 𝐴 is the surface 
area of the 3D model, and 𝑑 is the distance between camera and object. However, there is no optimal 
value for this normalized score and it could be used just for a relative comparison of the planning 
approaches. Moreover, some hyper-parameters should be added to equation (4) to tune the importance 
of viewpoint and path planning quality measures for different applications. 
3.2 Outdoor 3D reconstruction benchmarks 
Preparation of reliable ground truth for the whole scene is not a straight-forward task. Usually, more than one 
sensor should be utilized (Bouziani et al., 2021) to capture the entire object with the accuracy of at least one level 
of magnitude better than the data under investigation. Therefore, many researchers perform the qualitative 
evaluation on real datasets, while quantitative evaluation is performed on synthetic datasets (Hepp et al., 2018b; 
Yan et al., 2021).  
                                                          
1 Cloud to Mesh 
2 Cloud to Cloud 

21 
 
Unreal Engine (UE1) is a game development engine that produces photorealistic scenes. UE is by far the most 
common simulation environment which is used in many researches in viewpoint and path planning field (Hepp et 
al., 2018b; Kuang et al., 2020; Peng and Isler, 2018; Roberts et al., 2017). An open-source Python library called 
UnrealCV (Qiu et al., 2017) could also be used to set the camera parameters and control a virtual camera in the 
simulated environments (Peng and Isler, 2019; Roberts et al., 2017). Since there is full control over the camera 
parameters, objects (like buildings) and also lighting and texture it is possible to create many different scenes and 
reconfigure their attributes that is a very useful tool for evaluation purposes. Smith et al. (2018) created a 
benchmark which consists of 34 uniquely different buildings in five large urban scenes and packaged them within 
a release project of UE, which is publicly accessible via their project website2. The authors developed a new 
synthetic benchmark dataset and simulation environment for UAV path planning problem in urban environments 
making it possible to quantitatively evaluate other viewpoints and path planning algorithms. A small part of one 
of synthetic samples from this benchmark is illustrated in Figure 8a. Microsoft AirSim (Shah et al., 2017), an 
open-source UAV simulator built on Unreal Engine, is also employed in the literature to simulate the flight process 
and plan the UAV flight path (Arce Munoz, 2020; Kuang et al., 2020).  
Unity game engine3 is another environment that is employed in (Sharma et al., 2019) to create a 3D scene 
(see Figure 8b). Scripting capabilities of the game engine provides the possibility to capture the images using a 
virtual camera. An experimental Unity release of AirSim is also announced4. In some studies like (Koch et al., 
2019) the authors generated their synthetic dataset (see Figure 8c.) using other environments e.g. open-source 
computer graphics software Blender (Blender_Online_Community, 2018) which is a well-known 3D modeling 
and rendering package. 3D architecture models from the3D Ware-house of SketchUp5 are also used (Huang et al., 
2018). The authors used the Gazebo robot simulator6 for simulation and controlling the platform.  
 
a 
b 
c 
Figure 8: Three examples of synthetic environments: a) Part of one of the synthetic samples from (Smith et al., 2018) left part of the scene 
is shown after texturing, while the right side is shown before texturing. b) A series of building in Unity engine7. c) synthetic dataset created 
in (Koch et al., 2019) using Blender. 
Terragen8, a scenery generator program, is another environment employed in the literature (Liu et al., 2019; 
Martin et al., 2015). Recently, the concept of an autonomous environment generator for UAV-based simulation 
based on machine learning algorithms is introduced in (Nakama et al., 2021). Based on satellite images, this 
approach introduced the concept of procedurally generating, scaling, and placing 3D models to create a realistic 
environment. The interested reader can refer to (Hentati et al., 2018; Nakama et al., 2021) for more details on 
simulation environments. 
                                                          
1 https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/ 
2 https://vccimaging.org/Publications/Smith2018UAVPathPlanning/ 
3 https://unity.com/ 
4 https://microsoft.github.io/AirSim/ 
5 https://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com/ 
6 http://gazebosim.org  
7 https://unityassetsfreedom.club/download/town-constructor-pack/  
8 https://planetside.co.uk/ 

22 
 
4 
Discussion and future trends 
Although much work and progress are observable in the field of viewpoint and path planning, existing 
algorithms are far from the last word on this topic, and there is plenty of exciting work left to do. In this section, 
we discuss the current challenges in viewpoint and path planning approaches which show the direction for future 
research on this topic. 
Most of the model-free approaches rely on NBV and rapidly traverse along the direction that decreases the 
model uncertainty without using any prior information about the scene and object. Although this is very efficient 
for fast exploration of the objects, their local search strategy within a non-linear objective function may get stuck 
in local minima. It cannot guarantee a complete coverage of the object, especially its details. Furthermore, most 
model-free methods use stereo cameras or depth cameras to capture data for 3D reconstruction. It means the 
platform should get close enough to the object. Although it is feasible for indoor applications and small objects, 
it could be very time-consuming or even impossible for large-scale 3D reconstruction purposes. On the other 
hand, having a-priori knowledge of the general geometry enables the explore-and-exploit methods to optimize 
the coverage and accuracy of the results globally leading to high-quality results and smoother trajectories. 
However, most of the existing explore-and-exploit approaches are off-line and do not update the computed poses 
based on the online feedback from the data capturing unit. Therefore, considering the current computational power 
of on-board processing units, refining the global design of the poses and updating them locally based on the 
feedback from the acquired images could be a very interesting direction for future research. Nowadays, this idea 
could also be more realistic with the availability of very fast data transfer technologies like 5G and the popularity 
of cloud-based processing. This also could close the gap between two flight missions (exploration and 
exploitation) which requires two visits from the site, which is not always possible in practice.  
Like almost all other projects in engineering, one interesting direction could be as-planned vs. as-is 
investigation. Even in the case of a perfect planning, many other issues could affect the final outcome. Hardware 
limitations, meteorological conditions, objects complexities, and sensor-object relative conditions are the main 
factors that can greatly increase the uncertainty of the motion and state of the MAV or the quality of the final 
product. GNSS hardware and setup is an example in this regard which affects the data capturing quality. Although 
GNSS provides valuable information for UAV-based data capturing and processing, when the platforms fly at a 
low distance to the object of interest or under the structures like bridges, the GNSS signal can be strongly 
disturbed. Therefore, integrating visual SLAM and GNSS-based navigation and data capturing could be an 
interesting topic to have the best of both worlds. Drift on the gimbal and the magnetometer compass affects 
capturing the data with the already planned angles. Furthermore, due to safety issues e.g., minimum controllable 
flight height, some lower parts of the structures cannot be well captured and reconstructed (Kuang et al., 2020). 
To the best of our knowledge, most of the current approaches are designed for ideal conditions and neglect the 
effect of wind and other meteorological conditions. For example, wind affects the platform’s ability to reach the 
planned viewpoints. Some studies (Kim and Eustice, 2015; Papachristos et al., 2019b) addressed the problems 
occurring by fast motion of the platform by considering the localization uncertainty of SLAM for view planning. 
They integrated exploration or coverage planning with an active SLAM approach, which aims to minimize the 
localization uncertainty of SLAM. They produced navigation paths tracking many SLAM features to reduce 
localization uncertainty. However, although their methods improved the localization accuracy, MAVs are still 
unable to navigate quickly because the generated paths do not satisfy MAV's dynamic properties. The integration 
of the active SLAM approaches (Kim and Eustice, 2015; Papachristos et al., 2019b) and the fast motion generation 
methods (Cieslewski et al., 2017; Dharmadhikari et al., 2020) could be another direction for future work. Since 
battery limitation (flight time) is a challenge for almost all systems, multi-agent systems like (He et al., 2021) 
seem to be very effective for large-scale 3D reconstruction purposes. However, current challenges like efficient 
and reliable tasks distribution between the agent are still challenging. 
Besides all deviations caused by hardware imperfection and environmental conditions, the appearance of the 
objects with different materials can also affect the quality of 3D reconstruction. Shadow and illumination are also 
very important factors that can hinder reaching a high-fidelity 3D model. Reflective or low-texture surfaces like 
glass should also be considered. Moreover, since the texture is related to scale, it can pose another constraint on 
viewpoint planning which affects the acceptable distance between the sensor and low-texture parts of the objects. 
Hence, deviation of as-is poses of the captured images from as-planned ones necessitates an iterative closed-loop 
and online feedback between data capturing and planning modules that could be another direction for future 
research.  

23 
 
Since the perception of the surrounding environment is a key for collision-free UAV flight, commercial UAVs 
are equipped with some algorithms/sensors to perform a safe flight. However, when dealing with dynamic scenes 
(which is the case in many real scenarios), other considerations like moving objects detection also comes into play 
and should be considered in data capturing. Recently, (Tullu et al., 2021) employed a YoLO object detector 
(Redmon and Farhadi, 2018) to find obstacles and pedestrians in UAV’s navigation environment. This would also 
be important to avoid any occlusion caused by moving objects between the sensor and the object of interest. 
While some algorithms prioritize reconstruction quality, others emphasize the flight time (equivalently 
trajectory length or the number of images). Future research could also concentrate on finding reasonable and 
flexible solutions that can switch between these two possibilities or even add some hyperparameters for tuning 
the importance of 3D reconstruction quality and the trajectory length in order to fulfill the requirements of 
different applications. 
AI and Machine learning-based approaches: Some studies recently applied machine learning techniques for 
viewpoint and path planning. Hepp et al. (2018a) proposed an NBV planning method where the viewpoint’s utility 
is computed from a 3D convolutional neural network (CNN). The method used a multi-scale voxel representation 
of a partially explored scene as an input of the CNN. It trains utility scores of viewpoints from an oracle with 
access to ground truth information. Peralta et al. (Peralta et al., 2020) also proposed a learning-based NBV 
planning method for scanning houses. They provide a dataset of 3D house models for training NBV policies. The 
Authors trained a deep Q-network (Lillicrap et al., 2016) and deep deterministic policy gradient (Lillicrap et al., 
2016) based on the house dataset. Zeng et al. (2020) proposed a deep-learning network for NBV planning, which 
directly uses raw point cloud data instead of a volumetric model. The network extracts the feature of partially 
reconstructed point cloud and predicts the information gain of viewpoints from the extracted feature. This network 
can estimate an information gain more efficiently than the conventional ray-casting approaches. An exploration 
planning method based on deep reinforcement learning is proposed in (Zhu et al., 2018). This method trains 
topological information of an office-like environment, which provides a guide to efficiently compute the visiting 
sequence for unexplored regions. Martin et al. (2016) proposed using genetic algorithms to optimize viewpoint 
planning for accurate 3D reconstruction using small UAVs. The coverage and accuracy of the generated model 
are formulated in the objective function of the Genetic algorithms. The objective function is defined based on the 
number of visible terrain points in the images of a solution set and the need to capture terrain points from multiple 
angles. The evaluation results show the improvement in the completeness and standard deviations of case studies 
in comparison with the basic grid survey. A hierarchical framework for path generation, coverage path planning, 
and dynamic obstacle avoidance is presented in (Lei et al., 2022). Satellite images and maps of farms were used 
via a deep learning method for path planning. A faster R-CNN network (Ren et al., 2017) localizes and identifies 
objects and obstacles of humans and vehicles. Xie et al. (2021) proposed a deep reinforcement learning approach 
for path planning in a dynamic environment. They formulated this issue as a Partially Observable Markov 
Decision Process and solved it by utilizing the local information and relative distance without global information. 
Historical state-action sequences and multi-sensors are used by the proposed method to achieve more reasonable 
decision-making. Although there is a rich body of literature on AI-based path and coverage planning (Aggarwal 
and Kumar, 2020; Kaba et al., 2017; Pehlivanoglu and Pehlivanoglu, 2021; Sonmez et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 
2021; Zhao et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2021), viewpoint planning for 3D reconstruction based on AI and 
machine/deep learning approaches are still in its infancy and there is a large room to deepen the insight into this 
topic. 
Acknowledgments  
This research is funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) – TRR 277/1 2020 - Project number 
414265976. M.Maboudi and M. Gerke would like to thank the DFG for the support within the SFB/Transregio 
277- Additive manufacturing in construction. (Subproject C06). 
References 
Acharya, B.S., Bhandari, M., Bandini, F., Pizarro, A., Perks, M., Joshi, D.R., Wang, S., Dogwiler, T., Ray, R.L., 
Kharel, G., Sharma, S., 2021. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Hydrology and Water Management: Applications, 
Challenges, 
and 
Perspectives. 
Water 
Resour. 
Res. 
57, 
e2021WR029925. 
https://doi.org/10.1029/2021WR029925 

24 
 
Aggarwal, S., Kumar, N., 2020. Path planning techniques for unmanned aerial vehicles: A review, solutions, and 
challenges. Comput. Commun. 149, 270–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMCOM.2019.10.014 
Agisoft, 
2022. 
Agisoft: 
Mission 
planning 
for 
complex 
structures 
[WWW 
Document]. 
URL 
https://agisoft.freshdesk.com/support/solutions/articles/31000157953-mission-planning-for-complex-
structures (accessed 2.20.22). 
Ahmadabadian, A.H., Robson, S., Boehm, J., Shortis, M., 2014. Stereo-imaging network design for precise and 
dense 3d reconstruction. Photogramm. Rec. 29, 317–336. https://doi.org/10.1111/phor.12076 
Almadhoun, R., Taha, T., Seneviratne, L., Dias, J., Cai, G., 2016. A survey on inspecting structures using robotic 
systems: Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst. 13, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1177/1729881416663664 
Almadhoun, R., Taha, T., Seneviratne, L., Zweiri, Y., 2019. A survey on multi-robot coverage path planning for 
model reconstruction and mapping. SN Appl. Sci. 2019 18 1, 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1007/S42452-019-0872-
Y 
Aloimonos, J., Weiss, I., Bandyopadhyay, A., 1988. Active vision. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 1987 14 1, 333–356. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00133571 
Alsadik, B., Remondino, F., 2020. Flight Planning for LiDAR-Based UAS Mapping Applications. ISPRS Int. J. 
Geo-Information 2020, Vol. 9, Page 378 9, 378. https://doi.org/10.3390/IJGI9060378 
Arce Munoz, S., 2020. Optimized 3D Reconstruction for Infrastructure Inspection with Automated Structure from 
Motion and Machine Learning Methods Learning Methods. Brigham Young University. 
Basiri, A., Mariani, V., Silano, G., Aatif, M., Iannelli, L., Glielmo, L., 2022. A survey on the application of path-
planning 
algorithms 
for 
multi-rotor 
UAVs 
in 
precision 
agriculture. 
J. 
Navig. 
1–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0373463321000825 
Batinovic, A., Ivanovic, A., Petrovic, T., Bogdan, S., 2022. A Shadowcasting-Based Next-Best-View Planner for 
Autonomous 
3D 
Exploration. 
IEEE 
Robot. 
Autom. 
Lett. 
7, 
2969–2976. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2022.3146586 
Batinovic, A., Petrovic, T., Ivanovic, A., Petric, F., Bogdan, S., 2021. A Multi-Resolution Frontier-Based Planner 
for Autonomous 3D Exploration. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 6. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2021.3068923 
Bircher, A., Alexis, K., Burri, M., Oettershagen, P., Omari, S., Mantel, T., Siegwart, R., 2015. Structural 
inspection path planning via iterative viewpoint resampling with application to aerial robotics, in: International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, pp. 6423–6430. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2015.7140101 
Bircher, A., Kamel, M., Alexis, K., Oleynikova, H., Siegwart, R., 2018. Receding horizon path planning for 3D 
exploration and surface inspection. Auton. Robots 42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-016-9610-0 
Bircher, A., Kamel, M., Alexis, K., Oleynikova, H., Siegwart, R., 2016. Receding horizon next-best-view planner 
for 3D exploration, in: Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2016.7487281 
Blender_Online_Community, 2018. Blender - a 3D modelling and rendering package. Stichting Blender 
Foundation, Amsterdam. 
Bogaerts, B., Sels, S., Vanlanduit, S., Penne, R., 2019. Near-Optimal Path Planning for Complex Robotic 
Inspection Tasks 1–16. 
Bolourian, N., Hammad, A., 2020. LiDAR-equipped UAV path planning considering potential locations of defects 
for bridge inspection. Autom. Constr. 117, 103250. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AUTCON.2020.103250 
Bouziani, M., Chaaba, H., Ettarid, M., 2021. Evaluation of 3D Building Model using Terrestrial Laser Scanning 
and Drone Photogrammetry. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. - ISPRS Arch. 46, 39–42. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/ISPRS-ARCHIVES-XLVI-4-W4-2021-39-2021 
Bucker, A., Bonatti, R., Scherer, S., 2020. Do You See What I See? Coordinating Multiple Aerial Cameras for 
Robot Cinematography. 

25 
 
Cao, C., Zhu, H., Choset, H., Zhang, J., 2021. TARE: A Hierarchical Framework for Efficiently Exploring 
Complex 3D Environments. https://doi.org/10.15607/rss.2021.xvii.018 
Charrow, B., Kahn, G., Patil, S., Liu, S., Goldberg, K., Abbeel, P., Michael, N., Kumar, V., 2015a. Information-
theoretic planning with trajectory optimization for dense 3D mapping. Robot. Sci. Syst. 11. 
https://doi.org/10.15607/RSS.2015.XI.003 
Charrow, B., Liu, S., Kumar, V., Michael, N., 2015b. Information-theoretic mapping using Cauchy-Schwarz 
Quadratic Mutual Information. Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. 2015-June, 4791–4798. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2015.7139865 
Chekuri, C., Pál, M., 2005. A recursive greedy algorithm for walks in directed graphs. Proc. - Annu. IEEE Symp. 
Found. Comput. Sci. FOCS 2005, 245–253. https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.2005.9 
Chen, S., Li, Y., Kwok, N.M., 2011. Active vision in robotic systems: A survey of recent developments: Int. J. 
Rob. Res. 30, 1343–1377. https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364911410755 
Chen, S.Y., Li, Y.F., 2005. Vision sensor planning for 3-D model acquisition. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. 
Part B Cybern. 35. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMCB.2005.846907 
Cieslewski, T., Kaufmann, E., Scaramuzza, D., 2017. Rapid exploration with multi-rotors: A frontier selection 
method for high speed flight, in: IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2017.8206030 
Connolly, C.I., 1985. The determination of next best views. Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. 432–435. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ROBOT.1985.1087372 
DadrasJavan, F., Samadzadegan, F., Seyed Pourazar, S.H., Fazeli, H., 2019. UAV-based multispectral imagery 
for fast Citrus Greening detection. J. Plant Dis. Prot. 2019 1264 126, 307–318. https://doi.org/10.1007/S41348-
019-00234-8 
Dai, A., Papatheodorou, S., Funk, N., Tzoumanikas, D., Leutenegger, S., 2020. Fast Frontier-based Information-
driven Autonomous Exploration with an MAV, in: Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Robotics 
and Automation. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9196707 
Daudelin, J., Campbell, M., 2017. An Adaptable, Probabilistic, Next-Best View Algorithm for Reconstruction of 
Unknown 3-D Objects. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2017.2660769 
Debus, P., Rodehorst, V., 2021. Evaluation of 3D Uas Flight Path Planning Algorithms. Int. Arch. Photogramm. 
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. XLIII-B1-2, 157–164. https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-xliii-b1-2021-157-
2021 
Dellaert, F., Kaess, M., 2006. Square root SAM: Simultaneous localization and mapping via square root 
information 
smoothing, 
in: 
International 
Journal 
of 
Robotics 
Research. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364906072768 
Delmerico, J., Isler, S., Sabzevari, R., Scaramuzza, D., 2018. A comparison of volumetric information gain metrics 
for active 3D object reconstruction. Auton. Robots 42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-017-9634-0 
Deris, A., Trigonis, I., Aravanis, A., Stathopoulou, E.K., 2017. Depth cameras on UAVs: A first approach, in: 
International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. International 
Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, pp. 231–236. https://doi.org/10.5194/ISPRS-ARCHIVES-
XLII-2-W3-231-2017 
Dharmadhikari, M., Dang, T., Solanka, L., Loje, J., Nguyen, H., Khedekar, N., Alexis, K., 2020. Motion 
Primitives-based Path Planning for Fast and Agile Exploration using Aerial Robots, in: Proceedings - IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9196964 
Dissanayake, G., Sukkarieh, S., Nebot, E., Durrant-Whyte, H., 2001. The aiding of a low-cost strapdown inertial 
measurement unit using vehicle model constraints for land vehicle applications. IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 
17. https://doi.org/10.1109/70.964672 

26 
 
Eltner, A., Hoffmeister, D., Kaiser, A., Karrasch, P., Klingbeil, L., Stöcker, C., Rovere, A., 2022. UAVs for the 
Environmental Sciences; Methods and Applications. 
Eskandari, R., Mahdianpari, M., Mohammadimanesh, F., Salehi, B., Brisco, B., Homayouni, S., 2020. Meta-
analysis of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) Imagery for Agro-environmental Monitoring Using Machine 
Learning 
and 
Statistical 
Models. 
Remote 
Sens. 
2020, 
Vol. 
12, 
Page 
3511 
12, 
3511. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/RS12213511 
Estrada, C., Neira, J., Tardós, J.D., 2005. Hierarchical SLAM: Real-time accurate mapping of large environments. 
IEEE Trans. Robot. 21. https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2005.844673 
Fang, B., Zhan, Z., 2020. A visual SLAM method based on point-line fusion in weak-matching scene: Int. J. Adv. 
Robot. Syst. 17. https://doi.org/10.1177/1729881420904193 
Fiz, J.I., Martín, P.M., Cuesta, R., Subías, E., Codina, D., Cartes, A., 2022. Examples and Results of Aerial 
Photogrammetry in Archeology with UAV: Geometric Documentation, High Resolution Multispectral 
Analysis, 
Models 
and 
3D 
Printing. 
Drones 
2022, 
Vol. 
6, 
Page 
59 
6, 
59. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/DRONES6030059 
Fraser, C., 1984. Network design considerations for non-topographic photogrammetry. Photogramm. Eng. 
Remote Sens. 50, 1115–1126. 
Galceran, E., Carreras, M., 2013. A survey on coverage path planning for robotics. Rob. Auton. Syst. 61, 1258–
1276. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ROBOT.2013.09.004 
Golden, B.L., Levy, L., Vohra, R., 1987. The orienteering problem. Nav. Res. Logist. 34, 307–318. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/1520-6750(198706) 
González-Jorge, H., Martínez-Sánchez, J., Bueno, M., Arias, P., 2017. Unmanned Aerial Systems for Civil 
Applications: A Review. Drones 2017, Vol. 1, Page 2 1, 2. https://doi.org/10.3390/DRONES1010002 
Gu, X., Fan, Z., Zhu, S., Dai, Z., Tan, F., Tan, P., 2020. Cascade Cost Volume for High-Resolution Multi-View 
Stereo and Stereo Matching, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00257 
Gunawan, A., Lau, H.C., Vansteenwegen, P., 2016. Orienteering Problem: A survey of recent variants, solution 
approaches and applications. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 255, 315–332. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EJOR.2016.04.059 
Hardouin, G., Morbidi, F., Moras, J., Marzat, J., Mouaddib, E.M., 2020. Surface-driven Next-Best-View planning 
for 
exploration 
of 
large-scale 
3D 
environments, 
in: 
IFAC-PapersOnLine. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2020.12.2376 
He, K., Gkioxari, G., Dollar, P., Girshick, R., 2017. Mask R-CNN, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on 
Computer Vision (ICCV). IEEE, pp. 2980–2988. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.322 
He, W., Qi, X., Liu, L., 2021. A novel hybrid particle swarm optimization for multi-UAV cooperate path planning. 
Appl. Intell. 51, 7350–7364. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10489-020-02082-8 
Heng, L., Gotovos, A., Krause, A., Pollefeys, M., 2015. Efficient visual exploration and coverage with a micro 
aerial vehicle in unknown environments. Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. 2015-June, 1071–1078. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2015.7139309 
Hentati, A.I., Krichen, L., Fourati, M., Fourati, L.C., 2018. Simulation Tools, Environments and Frameworks for 
UAV Systems Performance Analysis. 2018 14th Int. Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput. Conf. IWCMC 2018 
1495–1500. https://doi.org/10.1109/IWCMC.2018.8450505 
Hepp, B., 2018. Planning for Autonomous Micro-Aerial Vehicles with Applications to Filming and 3D Modeling. 
ETH Zürich. 
Hepp, B., Dey, D., Sinha, S.N., Kapoor, A., Joshi, N., Hilliges, O., 2018a. Learn-to-score: Efficient 3D scene 
exploration by predicting view utility. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. 
Lect. Notes Bioinformatics) 11219 LNCS, 455–472. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01267-0_27 

27 
 
Hepp, B., Niebner, M., Hilliges, O., 2018b. Plan3D: Viewpoint and trajectory optimization for aerial multi-view 
stereo reconstruction. ACM Trans. Graph. 38, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3233794 
Hoppe, C., Wendel, A., Zollmann, S., Pirker, K., Irschara, A., Bischof, H., Kluckner, S., 2012. Photogrammetric 
Camera Network Design for Micro Aerial Vehicles Photogrammetric Camera Network Design for Micro Aerial 
Vehicles, in: 17th Computer Vision Winter Workshop. 
Hornung, A., Wurm, K.M., Bennewitz, M., Stachniss, C., Burgard, W., 2013. OctoMap: An efficient probabilistic 
3D mapping framework based on octrees. Auton. Robots 34. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-012-9321-0 
Hornung, A., Zeng, B., Kobbelt, L., 2008. Image selection for improved multi-view stereo. 26th IEEE Conf. 
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognition, CVPR. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2008.4587688 
Hosseininaveh, A., Remondino, F., 2021. An imaging network design for UGV-based 3D reconstruction of 
buildings. Remote Sens. 13, 1–28. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs13101923 
Huang, P., Lin, L., Xu, K., Huang, H., 2020. Autonomous Outdoor Scanning via Online Topological and 
Geometric 
Path 
Optimization. 
IEEE 
Trans. 
Intell. 
Transp. 
Syst. 
1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2020.3039557 
Huang, R., Zou, D., Vaughan, R., Tan, P., 2018. Active Image-Based Modeling with a Toy Drone, in: IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 
pp. 6124–6131. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2018.8460673 
Jacob-Loyola, N., Muñoz-La Rivera, F., Herrera, R.F., Atencio, E., 2021. Unmanned aerial vehicles (Uavs) for 
physical progress monitoring of construction. Sensors 21. https://doi.org/10.3390/S21124227 
Jing, W., Deng, D., Wu, Y., Shimada, K., 2020. Multi-UAV coverage path planning for the inspection of large 
and 
complex 
structures. 
IEEE 
Int. 
Conf. 
Intell. 
Robot. 
Syst. 
1480–1486. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS45743.2020.9341089 
Jing, W., Deng, D., Xiao, Z., Liu, Y., Shimada, K., 2019. Coverage Path Planning using Path Primitive Sampling 
and Primitive Coverage Graph for Visual Inspection. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst. 1472–1479. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS40897.2019.8967969 
Jing, W., Polden, J., Tao, P.Y., Lin, W., Shimada, K., 2016. View planning for 3D shape reconstruction of 
buildings with unmanned aerial vehicles, in: 14th International Conference on Control, Automation, Robotics 
and Vision, ICARCV 2016. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICARCV.2016.7838774 
Just, G.E., Pellenz, M.E., De Paula Lima, L.A., Chang, B.S., Souza, R.D., Montejo-Sánchez, S., 2020. UAV Path 
Optimization for Precision Agriculture Wireless Sensor Networks. Sensors 2020, Vol. 20, Page 6098 20, 6098. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/S20216098 
Kaba, M.D., Uzunbas, M.G., Lim, S.N., 2017. A reinforcement learning approach to the view planning problem, 
in: 30th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017. pp. 5094–5102. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.541 
Karaman, 
S., 
Frazzoli, 
E., 
2011. 
Sampling-based 
algorithms 
for 
optimal 
motion 
planning: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0278364911406761 30, 846–894. https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364911406761 
Kazhdan, M., Hoppe, H., 2013. Screened poisson surface reconstruction. ACM Trans. Graph. 32. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2487228.2487237 
Kerle, N., Nex, F., Gerke, M., Duarte, D., Vetrivel, A., 2019. UAV-Based Structural Damage Mapping: A Review. 
ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Information 9, 14. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi9010014 
Kim, A., Eustice, R.M., 2015. Active visual SLAM for robotic area coverage: Theory and experiment. Int. J. Rob. 
Res. 34. https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364914547893 
Knapitsch, A., Park, J., Zhou, Q.-Y., Koltun, V., 2017. Tanks and Temples: Benchmarking Large-Scale Scene 
Reconstruction. ACM Trans. Graph. 36, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3072959.3073599 
Koch, T., 2020. Automated and Precise 3D Building Reconstruction using UAVs. TU Munich. 

28 
 
Koch, T., Körner, M., Fraundorfer, F., 2019. Automatic and Semantically-Aware 3D UAV Flight Planning for 
Image-Based 3D Reconstruction. Remote Sens. 11, 1550. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs11131550 
Kompis, Y., Bartolomei, L., Mascaro, R., Teixeira, L., Chli, M., 2021. Informed Sampling Exploration Path 
Planner for 3D Reconstruction of Large Scenes. https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-b-000501333 
Kuang, Q., Wu, J., Pan, J., Zhou, B., 2020. Real-Time UAV Path Planning for Autonomous Urban Scene 
Reconstruction, in: International Conference on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, pp. 1156–1162. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9196558 
Lee, I.D., Seo, J.H., Kim, Y.M., Choi, J., Han, S., Yoo, B., 2020. Automatic Pose Generation for Robotic 3-D 
Scanning of Mechanical Parts. IEEE Trans. Robot. 36, 1219–1238. https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2020.2980161 
Lei, T., Luo, C., Jan, G.E., Bi, Z., 2022. Deep Learning-Based Complete Coverage Path Planning With Re-Joint 
and Obstacle Fusion Paradigm. Front. Robot. AI 9, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2022.843816 
Leonard, J.J., Durrant-Whyte, H.F., 1991. Simultaneous map building and localization for an autonomous mobile 
robot, in: IROS ’91:IEEE/RSJ International Workshop on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IEEE, pp. 1442–
1447. https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.1991.174711 
Li, Y., Liu, C., 2018. Applications of multirotor drone technologies in construction management. Int. J. Constr. 
Manag. 19, 401–412. https://doi.org/10.1080/15623599.2018.1452101 
Lillicrap, T.P., Hunt, J.J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., Wierstra, D., 2016. Continuous 
control with deep reinforcement learning, in: 4th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 
2016 - Conference Track Proceedings. 
Liu, C., Zhang, S., Akbar, A., 2019. Ground Feature Oriented Path Planning for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
Mapping. 
IEEE 
J. 
Sel. 
Top. 
Appl. 
Earth 
Obs. 
Remote 
Sens. 
12, 
1175–1187. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2019.2899369 
Long, J., Shelhamer, E., Darrell, T., 2015. Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. Proc. IEEE 
Comput. 
Soc. 
Conf. 
Comput. 
Vis. 
Pattern 
Recognit. 
07-12-June-2015, 
431–440. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298965 
Maboudi, M., Alamouri, A., López De Arriba, V., Bajauri, M.S., Berger, C., Gerke, M., 2021. Drone-Based 
Container Crane Inspection: Concept, Challenges and Preliminary Results, in: ISPRS Annals of the 
Photogrammetry, 
Remote 
Sensing 
and 
Spatial 
Information 
Sciences. 
pp. 
121–128. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/ISPRS-ANNALS-V-1-2021-121-2021 
Maboudi, M., Bánhidi, D., Gerke, M., 2018. Investigation of Geometric Performance of an Indoor Mobile 
Mapping System, in: ISPRS - International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial 
Information Sciences. pp. 637–642. https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-637-2018 
Maldonado, O.A.M., Hadfield, S., Pugeault, N., Bowden, R., 2016. Next-Best Stereo: Extending Next-Best View 
Optimisation For Collaborative Sensors, in: Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC). 
pp. 65.1-65.12. https://doi.org/10.5244/C.30.65 
Malihi, S., Zoej, M.J.V., Hahn, M., Mokhtarzade, M., 2018. Window Detection from UAS-Derived 
Photogrammetric Point Cloud Employing Density-Based Filtering and Perceptual Organization. Remote Sens. 
2018, Vol. 10, Page 1320 10, 1320. https://doi.org/10.3390/RS10081320 
Martin, R.A., Rojas, I., Franke, K., Hedengren, J.D., 2015. Evolutionary View Planning for Optimized UAV 
Terrain Modeling in a Simulated Environment. Remote Sens. 2016, Vol. 8, Page 26 8, 26. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/RS8010026 
Mason, S., 1997. Heuristic Reasoning Strategy for Automated Sensor Placement. Photogramm. Eng. Remote 
Sens. 63, 1093–1102. 
Mauro, M., Riemenschneider, H., Signoroni, A., Leonardi, R., Van Gool, L., 2014. A unified framework for 
content-aware view selection and planning through view importance. Proc. BMVC 2014 1–11. 

29 
 
Meng, Z., Qin, H., Chen, Z., Chen, X., Sun, H., Lin, F., Ang, M.H., 2017. A two-stage optimized next-view 
planning framework for 3-D unknown environment exploration, and structural reconstruction. IEEE Robot. 
Autom. Lett. 2. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2017.2655144 
Monica, R., Aleotti, J., 2018. Contour-based next-best view planning from point cloud segmentation of unknown 
objects. Auton. Robots 42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-017-9618-0 
Montemerlo, M., Thrun, S., Koller, D., Wegbreit, B., 2002. FastSLAM: A factored solution to the simultaneous 
localization and mapping problem, in: Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 
Moravec, H.P., Elfes, A., 1985. High resolution maps from wide angle sonar, in: Proceedings - IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation. https://doi.org/10.1109/ROBOT.1985.1087316 
Mostegel, C., Rumpler, M., Fraundorfer, F., Bischof, H., 2016. UAV-Based Autonomous Image Acquisition with 
Multi-view Stereo Quality Assurance by Confidence Prediction, in: IEEE Computer Society Conference on 
Computer 
Vision 
and 
Pattern 
Recognition 
Workshops. 
IEEE 
Computer 
Society, 
pp. 
1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPRW.2016.8 
Mur-Artal, R., Montiel, J.M.M., Tardos, J.D., 2015. ORB-SLAM: A Versatile and Accurate Monocular SLAM 
System. IEEE Trans. Robot. 31. https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2015.2463671 
Nagasawa, R., Mas, E., Moya, L., Koshimura, S., 2021. Model-based analysis of multi-UAV path planning for 
surveying postdisaster building damage. Sci. Reports 2021 111 11, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-
97804-4 
Nakama, J., Parada, R., Matos-Carvalho, J.P., Azevedo, F., Pedro, D., Campos, L., 2021. Autonomous 
Environment Generator for UAV-Based Simulation. Appl. Sci. 11, 2185. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11052185 
Newcombe, R.A., Izadi, S., Hilliges, O., Molyneaux, D., Kim, D., Davison, A.J., Kohli, P., Shotton, J., Hodges, 
S., Fitzgibbon, A., 2011. KinectFusion: Real-time dense surface mapping and tracking, in: 2011 10th IEEE 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Mixed 
and 
Augmented 
Reality, 
ISMAR 
2011. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR.2011.6092378 
Nex, F., Armenakis, C., Cramer, M., Cucci, D.A., Gerke, M., Honkavaara, E., Kukko, A., Persello, C., Skaloud, 
J., 2022. UAV in the advent of the twenties: Where we stand and what is next. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote 
Sens. 184, 215–242. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ISPRSJPRS.2021.12.006 
Oleynikova, H., Taylor, Z., Fehr, M., Siegwart, R., Nieto, J., 2017. Voxblox: Incremental 3D Euclidean Signed 
Distance Fields for on-board MAV planning, in: IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems. https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2017.8202315 
Oßwald, S., Bennewitz, M., Burgard, W., Stachniss, C., 2016. Speeding-Up Robot Exploration by Exploiting 
Background Information. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 1. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2016.2520560 
Panda, M., Das, B., Subudhi, B., Pati, B.B., 2020. A Comprehensive Review of Path Planning Algorithms for 
Autonomous 
Underwater 
Vehicles. 
Int. 
J. 
Autom. 
Comput. 
2019 
173 
17, 
321–352. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/S11633-019-1204-9 
Papachristos, C., Kamel, M., Popović, M., Khattak, S., Bircher, A., Oleynikova, H., Dang, T., Mascarich, F., 
Alexis, K., Siegwart, R., 2019a. Autonomous Exploration and Inspection Path Planning for Aerial Robots Using 
the Robot Operating System. Stud. Comput. Intell. 778, 67–111. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91590-6_3 
Papachristos, C., Mascarich, F., Khattak, S., Dang, T., Alexis, K., 2019b. Localization uncertainty-aware 
autonomous exploration and mapping with aerial robots using receding horizon path-planning. Auton. Robots 
43. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-019-09864-1 
Pehlivanoglu, Y.V., Pehlivanoglu, P., 2021. An enhanced genetic algorithm for path planning of autonomous 
UAV 
in 
target 
coverage 
problems. 
Appl. 
Soft 
Comput. 
112, 
107796. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2021.107796 
Peng, C., Isler, V., 2020. Visual coverage path planning for urban environments. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 5, 
5961–5968. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2020.3010745 

30 
 
Peng, C., Isler, V., 2019. Adaptive View Planning for Aerial 3D Reconstruction, in: Proceedings - IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 
pp. 2981–2987. 
Peng, C., Isler, V., 2018. View Selection with Geometric Uncertainty Modelling, in: Robotics: Science and 
Systems. https://doi.org/10.15607/RSS.2018.XIV.025 
Peng, C., Isler, V., 2017. Optimal Reconstruction with a Small Number of Views. CoRR abs/1704.0. 
Peralta, D., Casimiro, J., Nilles, A.M., Aguilar, J.A., Atienza, R., Cajote, R., 2020. Next-Best View Policy for 3D 
Reconstruction, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66823-5_33 
Pizzoli, M., Forster, C., Scaramuzza, D., 2014. REMODE: Probabilistic, monocular dense reconstruction in real 
time, 
in: 
Proceedings 
- 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Robotics 
and 
Automation. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2014.6907233 
Popovic, M., Hitz, G., Nieto, J., Sa, I., Siegwart, R., Galceran, E., 2017. Online informative path planning for 
active 
classification 
using 
UAVs. 
Proc. 
- 
IEEE 
Int. 
Conf. 
Robot. 
Autom. 
5753–5758. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989676 
Qin, H., Meng, Z., Meng, W., Chen, X., Sun, H., Lin, F., Ang, M.H., 2019. Autonomous Exploration and Mapping 
System Using Heterogeneous UAVs and UGVs in GPS-Denied Environments. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 68, 
1339–1350. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2018.2890416 
Qiu, W., Zhong, F., Zhang, Y., Qiao, S., Xiao, Z., Kim, T.S., Wang, Y., Yuille, A., 2017. UnrealCV: Virtual 
worlds for computer vision. MM 2017 - Proc. 2017 ACM Multimed. Conf. 1221–1224. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3123266.3129396 
Radoglou-Grammatikis, P., Sarigiannidis, P., Lagkas, T., Moscholios, I., 2020. A compilation of UAV 
applications 
for 
precision 
agriculture. 
Comput. 
Networks 
172, 
107148. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMNET.2020.107148 
Rakha, T., Gorodetsky, A., 2018. Review of Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) applications in the built 
environment: Towards automated building inspection procedures using drones. Autom. Constr. 93, 252–264. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AUTCON.2018.05.002 
Redmon, 
J., 
Farhadi, 
A., 
2018. 
YOLOv3: 
An 
Incremental 
Improvement. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1804.02767 
Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., Sun, J., 2017. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region 
Proposal 
Networks. 
IEEE 
Trans. 
Pattern 
Anal. 
Mach. 
Intell. 
39, 
1137–1149. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2577031 
Roberts, M., 2019. Trajectory optimization methods for drone cameras. 
Roberts, M., Shah, S., Dey, D., Truong, A., Sinha, S., Kapoor, A., Hanrahan, P., Joshi, N., 2017. Submodular 
Trajectory Optimization for Aerial 3D Scanning, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Computer Vision. IEEE, pp. 5334–5343. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.569 
Rottensteiner, F., Sohn, G., Gerke, M., Wegner, J.D., Breitkopf, U., Jung, J., 2014. Results of the ISPRS 
benchmark on urban object detection and 3D building reconstruction. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 93, 
256–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ISPRSJPRS.2013.10.004 
Saadatseresht, M., Samadzadegan, F., Azizi, A., 2005. Automatic camera placement in vision metrology based 
on 
a 
fuzzy 
inference 
system. 
Photogramm. 
Eng. 
Remote 
Sensing 
71, 
1375–1385. 
https://doi.org/10.14358/PERS.71.12.1375 
Sadeghi, A., Asghar, A.B., Smith, S.L., 2019. On Minimum Time Multi-Robot Planning with Guarantees on the 
Total Collected Reward, in: International Symposium on Multi-Robot and Multi-Agent Systems, MRS 2019. 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 16–22. https://doi.org/10.1109/MRS.2019.8901079 

31 
 
Sahebdivani, S., Arefi, H., Maboudi, M., 2020. Rail Track Detection and Projection-Based 3D Modeling from 
UAV Point Cloud. Sensors 20, 5220. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20185220 
Saponaro, M., Capolupo, A., Tarantino, E., Fratino, U., 2019. Comparative Analysis of Different UAV-Based 
Photogrammetric Processes to Improve Product Accuracies. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. 
Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics) 11622 LNCS, 225–238. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
24305-0_18 
Scaramuzza, D., Achtelik, M.C., Doitsidis, L., Friedrich, F., Kosmatopoulos, E., Martinelli, A., Achtelik, M.W., 
Chli, M., Chatzichristofis, S., Kneip, L., Gurdan, D., Heng, L., Lee, G.H., Lynen, S., Pollefeys, M., Renzaglia, 
A., Siegwart, R., Stumpf, J.C., Tanskanen, P., Troiani, C., Weiss, S., Meier, L., 2014. Vision-controlled micro 
flying robots: From system design to autonomous navigation and mapping in GPS-denied environments. IEEE 
Robot. Autom. Mag. 21, 26–40. https://doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2014.2322295 
Schmid, K., Hirschmüller, H., Dömel, A., Grixa, I., Suppa, M., Hirzinger, G., 2012. View planning for multi-view 
stereo 3D Reconstruction using an autonomous multicopter. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. Theory Appl. 65, 309–323. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-011-9576-2 
Schmid, L., Pantic, M., Khanna, R., Ott, L., Siegwart, R., Nieto, J., 2020. An Efficient Sampling-Based Method 
for Online Informative Path Planning in Unknown Environments. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 5. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2020.2969191 
Schönberger, J.L., Zheng, E., Frahm, J.M., Pollefeys, M., 2016. Pixelwise View Selection for Unstructured Multi-
View Stereo. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics) 
9907 LNCS, 501–518. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46487-9_31 
Scott, W.R., Roth, G., Rivest, J.F., 2003. View planning for automated three-dimensional object reconstruction 
and inspection. ACM Comput. Surv. 35, 64–96. https://doi.org/10.1145/641865.641868 
Seitz, S.M., Curless, B., Diebel, J., Scharstein, D., Szeliski, R., 2006. A comparison and evaluation of multi-view 
stereo reconstruction algorithms. Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. 1, 519–526. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2006.19 
Seo, J., Duque, L., Wacker, J., 2018. Drone-enabled bridge inspection methodology and application. Autom. 
Constr. 94, 112–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AUTCON.2018.06.006 
Shade, R., Newman, P., 2011. Choosing where to go: Complete 3D exploration with Stereo, in: Proceedings - 
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2011.5980121 
Shah, S., Dey, D., Lovett, C., Kapoor, A., 2017. AirSim: High-Fidelity Visual and Physical Simulation for 
Autonomous Vehicles, in: Field and Service Robotics Conference (FSR 2017). Springer Science and Business 
Media B.V., pp. 621–635. https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1705.05065 
Shang, Z., Bradley, J., Shen, Z., 2020. A co-optimal coverage path planning method for aerial scanning of complex 
structures. Expert Syst. Appl. 158, 113535. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ESWA.2020.113535 
Sharma, O., Arora, N., Sagar, H., 2019. Image Acquisition for High Quality Architectural Reconstruction, in: 
Graphics Interface 2019. Kingston, Ontario. https://doi.org/10.20380/GI2019.18 
Shen, S., Michael, N., Kumar, V., 2012. Autonomous indoor 3D exploration with a micro-aerial vehicle. Proc. - 
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. 9–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2012.6225146 
Smith, N., Moehrle, N., Goesele, M., Heidrich, W., 2018. Aerial path planning for urban scene reconstruction: A 
continuous optimization method and benchmark, in: SIGGRAPH Asia 2018 Technical Papers, SIGGRAPH 
Asia 2018. https://doi.org/10.1145/3272127.3275010 
Song, S., Jo, S., 2018. Surface-Based Exploration for Autonomous 3D Modeling. Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. 
Autom. 4319–4326. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2018.8460862 
Song, S., Jo, S., 2017. Online inspection path planning for autonomous 3D modeling using a micro-aerial vehicle, 
in: 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Robotics 
and 
Automation 
(ICRA). 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989737 

32 
 
Song, S., Kim, D., Choi, S., 2021. View Path Planning via Online Multiview Stereo for 3-D Modeling of Large-
Scale Structures. IEEE Trans. Robot. 38, 372–390. https://doi.org/10.1109/tro.2021.3083197 
Song, S., Kim, D., Jo, S., 2020a. Online coverage and inspection planning for 3D modeling. Auton. Robot. 2020 
448 44, 1431–1450. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10514-020-09936-7 
Song, S., Kim, D., Jo, S., 2020b. Active 3D Modeling via Online Multi-View Stereo. Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. 
Robot. Autom. 5284–5291. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9197089 
Sonmez, A., Kocyigit, E., Kugu, E., 2015. Optimal path planning for UAVs using Genetic Algorithm. 2015 Int. 
Conf. Unmanned Aircr. Syst. ICUAS 2015 50–55. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICUAS.2015.7152274 
Stache, F., Westheider, J., Magistri, F., Popovic, M., Stachniss, C., 2021. Adaptive path planning for UAV-based 
multi-resolution semantic segmentation. 2021 10th Eur. Conf. Mob. Robot. ECMR 2021 - Proc. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ECMR50962.2021.9568788 
Sun, Y., Huang, Q., Hsiao, D.-Y., Guan, L., Hua, G., 2021. Learning View Selection for 3D Scenes. Proc. 
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. 14464–14473. 
Sun, Y., Ma, O., 2022. Automating Aircraft Scanning for Inspection or 3D Model Creation with a UAV and 
Optimal Path Planning. Drones 2022, Vol. 6, Page 87 6, 87. https://doi.org/10.3390/DRONES6040087 
Tan, C.S., Mohd-Mokhtar, R., Arshad, M.R., 2021. A Comprehensive Review of Coverage Path Planning in 
Robotics 
Using 
Classical 
and 
Heuristic 
Algorithms. 
IEEE 
Access 
9, 
119310–119342. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3108177 
Torresan, C., Berton, A., Carotenuto, F., Di Gennaro, S.F., Gioli, B., Matese, A., Miglietta, F., Vagnoli, C., Zaldei, 
A., Wallace, L., 2016. Forestry applications of UAVs in Europe: a review. Int. J. Remote Sens. 38, 2427–2447. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01431161.2016.1252477 
Tsagris, M., Beneki, C., Hassani, H., 2014. On the Folded Normal Distribution. Math. 2014, Vol. 2, Pages 12-28 
2, 12–28. https://doi.org/10.3390/MATH2010012 
Tullu, A., Endale, B., Wondosen, A., Hwang, H.-Y., 2021. Machine Learning Approach to Real-Time 3D Path 
Planning 
for 
Autonomous 
Navigation 
of 
Unmanned 
Aerial 
Vehicle. 
Appl. 
Sci. 
11, 
4706. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/APP11104706 
Ułanowicz, L., Sabak, R., 2021. Unmanned aerial vehicles supporting imagery intelligence using the structured 
light technology. Arch. Transp. 58, 35–45. https://doi.org/10.5604/01.3001.0014.8796 
Umari, H., Mukhopadhyay, S., 2017. Autonomous robotic exploration based on multiple rapidly-exploring 
randomized 
trees, 
in: 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Intelligent 
Robots 
and 
Systems. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2017.8202319 
Valente, J., Cerro, J. Del, Barrientos, A., Sanz, D., 2013. Aerial coverage optimization in precision agriculture 
management: A musical harmony inspired approach. Comput. Electron. Agric. 99, 153–159. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPAG.2013.09.008 
Vansteenwegen, P., Souffriau, W., Oudheusden, D. Van, 2011. The orienteering problem: A survey. Eur. J. Oper. 
Res. 209, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EJOR.2010.03.045 
Vasquez-Gomez, J.I., Lopez-Damian, E., Sucar, L.E., 2009. View planning for 3D object reconstruction, in: 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IROS 2009. pp. 4015–4020. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2009.5354383 
Vasquez-Gomez, J.I., Sucar, L.E., Murrieta-Cid, R., 2017. View/state planning for three-dimensional object 
reconstruction under uncertainty. Auton. Robots 41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-015-9531-3 
Wang, C., Ma, H., Chen, W., Liu, L., Meng, M.Q.H., 2020. Efficient Autonomous Exploration with Incrementally 
Built Topological Map in 3-D Environments. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 69, 9853–9865. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2020.3001816 
Whelan, T., Kaess, M., Johannsson, H., Fallon, M., Leonard, J.J., McDonald, J., 2014. Real-time large-scale dense 

33 
 
RGB-D 
SLAM 
with 
volumetric 
fusion: 
Int. 
J. 
Rob. 
Res. 
34, 
598–626. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364914551008 
Whelan, T., Salas-Moreno, R.F., Glocker, B., Davison, A.J., Leutenegger, S., 2016. ElasticFusion: Real-time 
dense SLAM 
and light source estimation, in: 
International Journal of 
Robotics Research. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364916669237 
Wu, S., Sun, W., Long, P., Huang, H., Cohen-Or Daniel, Gong, M., Deussen, O., Chen, B., 2014. Quality-driven 
poisson-guided autoscanning. ACM Trans. Graph. 33, 203. https://doi.org/10.1145/2661229.2661242 
Xie, R., Meng, Z., Wang, L., Li, H., Wang, K., Wu, Z., 2021. Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Path Planning Algorithm 
Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning in Large-Scale and Dynamic Environments. IEEE Access 9. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3057485 
Xu, L., Cheng, W., Guo, K., Han, L., Liu, Y., Fang, L., 2021. FlyFusion: Realtime Dynamic Scene Reconstruction 
Using 
a 
Flying 
Depth 
Camera. 
IEEE 
Trans. 
Vis. 
Comput. 
Graph. 
27, 
68–82. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2019.2930691 
Xu, Y., Turkan, Y., 2020. BrIM and UAS for bridge inspections and management. Eng. Constr. Archit. Manag. 
27, 785–807. https://doi.org/10.1108/ECAM-12-2018-0556/FULL/XML 
Yamauchi, B., 1997. Frontier-based approach for autonomous exploration, in: Proceedings of IEEE International 
Symposium 
on 
Computational 
Intelligence 
in 
Robotics 
and 
Automation, 
CIRA. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/cira.1997.613851 
Yan, F., Xia, E., Li, Z., Zhou, Z., 2021. Sampling-based path planning for high-quality aerial 3D reconstruction 
of urban scenes. Remote Sens. 13, 1–23. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs13050989 
Yoder, L., Scherer, S., 2016. Autonomous Exploration for Infrastructure Modeling with a Micro Aerial Vehicle, 
in: Wettergreen, D.S., Barfoot, T.D. (Eds.), Field and Service Robotics: Results of the 10th International 
Conference. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 427–440. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-27702-
8_28 
Zeng, R., Zhao, W., Liu, Y.J., 2020. PC-NBV: A point cloud based deep network for efficient next best view 
planning, 
in: 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Intelligent 
Robots 
and 
Systems. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS45743.2020.9340916 
Zhang, S., Liu, C., Haala, N., 2020. Three-Dimensional Path Planning of Uavs Imaging for Complete 
Photogrammetric Reconstruction, in: ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial 
Information Sciences. https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-annals-V-1-2020-325-2020 
Zhang, W., Zhang, S., Wu, F., Wang, Y., 2021. Path Planning of UAV Based on Improved Adaptive Grey Wolf 
Optimization Algorithm. IEEE Access 9, 89400–89411. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3090776 
Zhao, Y., Zheng, Z., Liu, Y., 2018. Survey on computational-intelligence-based UAV path planning. Knowledge-
Based Syst. 158, 54–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.KNOSYS.2018.05.033 
Zhou, X., Gao, F., Fang, X., Lan, Z., 2021. Improved Bat Algorithm for UAV Path Planning in Three-Dimensional 
Space. IEEE Access 9, 20100–20116. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3054179 
Zhou, X., Xie, K., Huang, K., Liu, Y., Zhou, Y., Gong, M., Huang, H., 2020a. Offsite aerial path planning for 
efficient urban scene reconstruction. ACM Trans. Graph. 39. https://doi.org/10.1145/3414685.3417791 
Zhou, X., Yi, Z., Liu, Y., Huang, K., Huang, H., 2020b. Survey on path and view planning for UAVs. Virtual 
Real. Intell. Hardw. 2, 56–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vrih.2019.12.004 
Zhu, D., Li, T., Ho, D., Wang, C., Meng, M.Q.H., 2018. Deep Reinforcement Learning Supervised Autonomous 
Exploration in Office Environments, in: Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2018.8463213 
 
