Virtual laser scanning with HELIOS++: A novel take on ray
tracing-based simulation of topographic 3D laser scanning
Lukas Winiwartera,∗, Alberto Manuel Esmor´ıs Penab, Hannah Weisera, Katharina
Andersa,c, Jorge Mart´ınez Sanchezb, Mark Searlea, Bernhard H¨oﬂea,c,∗
a3DGeo Research Group, Institute of Geography, Heidelberg University, Germany
bCentro Singular de Investigaci´on en Tecnolox´ıas Intelixentes, CiTIUS, USC, Spain
cInterdisciplinary Center for Scientiﬁc Computing (IWR), Heidelberg University, Germany
Abstract
Topographic laser scanning is a remote sensing method to create detailed 3D point cloud
representations of the Earth’s surface. Since data acquisition is expensive, simulations can
complement real data given certain premises are available: i) a model of 3D scene and
scanner, ii) a model of the beam-scene interaction, simpliﬁed to a computationally feasible
while physically realistic level, and iii) an application for which simulated data is ﬁt for
use. A number of laser scanning simulators for diﬀerent purposes exist, which we enrich
by presenting HELIOS++. HELIOS++ is an open-source simulation framework for ter-
restrial static, mobile, UAV-based and airborne laser scanning implemented in C++. The
HELIOS++ concept provides a ﬂexible solution for the trade-oﬀbetween physical accuracy
(realism) and computational complexity (runtime, memory footprint), as well as ease of
use and of conﬁguration. Unique features of HELIOS++ include the availability of Python
bindings (pyhelios) for controlling simulations, and a range of model types for 3D scene
representation. Such model types include meshes, digital terrain models, point clouds and
partially transmissive voxels, which are especially useful in laser scanning simulations of
vegetation. In a scene, object models of diﬀerent types can be combined, so that repre-
sentations spanning multiple spatial scales in diﬀerent resolutions and levels of detail are
possible. We aim for a modular design, where the core components of platform, scene, and
scanner can be individually interchanged, and easily conﬁgured by working with XML ﬁles
and Python bindings. Virtually scanned point clouds may be used for a broad range of
applications. Our literature review of publications employing virtual laser scanning revealed
the four categories of use cases prevailing at present: data acquisition planning, method
evaluation, method training and sensing experimentation. To enable direct interaction with
3D point cloud processing and GIS software, we support standard data formats for input
models (Wavefront Objects, GeoTIFFs, ASCII xyz point clouds) and output point clouds
(LAS/LAZ and ASCII). HELIOS++ further allows the simulation of beam divergence using
a subsampling strategy, and is able to create full-waveform outputs as a basis for detailed
analysis. As generation and analysis of waveforms can strongly impact runtimes, the user
may set the level of detail for the subsampling, or optionally disable full-waveform output
altogether.
A detailed assessment of computational considerations and a comparison of
1
arXiv:2101.09154v1  [cs.CV]  21 Jan 2021

HELIOS++ to its predecessor, HELIOS, reveal reduced runtimes by up to 83 %. At the
same time, memory requirements are reduced by up to 94 %, allowing for much larger (i.e.
more complex) 3D scenes to be loaded into memory and hence to be virtually acquired by
laser scanning simulation.
Keywords:
software, LiDAR simulation, point cloud, data generation, voxel, vegetation
modelling, diﬀuse media
1. Introduction
Simulation of physical processes is often carried out when experiments are not feasible
or simply impossible, or to ﬁnd parameters that produce a certain outcome if inversion is
non-trivial. In virtual laser scanning (VLS), simulations of LiDAR (Light Detection and
Ranging) create 3D point clouds from models of scenes, platforms, and scanners (Figure 1),
that aim to recreate real-world scenarios of laser scanning acquisitions. Such simulated point
clouds may, for certain use cases, replace real data, and may even allow for analyses where
real data capture is not feasible, e.g. due to technical, economical or logistic constraints,
or when simulating hardware which is not yet existing. However, there are use cases where
VLS is not appropriate, for example, when analysing eﬀects only partially modelled in the
simulation such as penetration of the laser into opaque objects.
In a similar argument,
(passive) photogrammetry is inadequate for the reconstruction of a non-textured ﬂat area,
but still a useful method for many other tasks. Therefore, VLS can be seen as a tool to
acquire 3D geospatial data under certain premises. These include:
1. an adequate model of the 3D scene and the scanner, as well as the platform behaviour,
2. a simpliﬁcation of the real-world beam-scene interactions to a computationally feasible
and physically realistic level, and ﬁnally,
3. an application for which VLS data is ﬁt for use.
VLS can easily and cheaply produce large amounts of data with very well deﬁned prop-
erties and known ground truth. Parameters (e.g. tree attributes such as crown base height)
can be extracted from the scene model (e.g. a mesh object that is being scanned) automati-
cally and without errors, and these parameters can in turn be used for training or validation
of algorithms that attempt to extract them from point cloud data. Due to the low cost
compared to real data acquisitions, VLS can be combined with Monte-Carlo simulations to
solve non-continuous optimisation problems on scan settings and acquisition strategies. In
a research workﬂow, VLS experiments may be employed to identify promising candidate
settings before carrying out a selected number of real experiments that are used to answer
the respective research questions.
∗Corresponding authors
Email addresses: lukas.winiwarter@uni-heidelberg.de (Lukas Winiwarter),
hoefle@uni-heidelberg.de (Bernhard H¨oﬂe)
Preprint submitted to Remote Sensing of Environment
January 25, 2021

Figure 1: Schematic concept of HELIOS++, showcasing platforms (boxed labels) and object models com-
posing a scene (non-boxed labels). A variety of model types to represent 3D scenes are supported: terrain
models, voxel models (custom .vox format or XYZ point clouds) and mesh models. For platforms, four
options are currently supported: airplane, multicopter, ground vehicle and static tripod. A schematic di-
verging laser beam and its corresponding waveform (magenta) is shown being emitted from the airplane and
interacting with a mesh model tree and the rasterised ground surface.
In this paper, we present a novel take on ray tracing-based VLS covering the given
premises (1-3). This is implemented as the open source software package HELIOS++ (Hei-
delberg LiDAR Operations Simulator ++)1. HELIOS++ is the successor of HELIOS (Bech-
told and H¨oﬂe, 2016), with a completely new code base, implemented in C++ (whereas the
former version was implemented in Java). HELIOS++ improves over HELIOS in terms
of memory footprint and runtime, and also in functionality, correctness of implemented
algorithms, and usability, making it versatile and highly performant to end users.
We ﬁrst motivate the need for a novel VLS framework by a survey of previous method-
ologies to laser scanning simulation and their applications, and point out the unique features
of HELIOS++ (Section 2). In Section 3, we present the architecture and design considera-
tions of HELIOS++. We then show diﬀerent types of applications and conduct a systematic
literature survey of uses of HELIOS in Section 4. Technical considerations concerning the
handling of big 3D scenes and ray tracing are dealt with in Section 5 and conclusions are
drawn in Section 6.
1HELIOS++ is available on GitHub (https://github.com/3dgeo-heidelberg/helios) and is licensed under
both GNU GPL and GNU LGPL. HELIOS++ is also indexed with Zenodo (Winiwarter et al., 2021).
3

2. Existing implementations and state of the art virtual laser scanning
Simulating a process within a system always involves a simpliﬁed substitute of reality.
The complexity of this substitute depends on the process understanding, on computational
considerations and on the speciﬁc problem that is to be solved. Approaches with diﬀerent
levels of simulation complexity exist regarding i) the type of input scene model (e.g. 2.5D
digital elevation models (DEMs) vs. 3D meshes) and ii) how the interaction of beam and
object is modeled (e.g. single ray/echo vs. full-waveform). An overview of publications of
these approaches is listed in Table 1.
A simple airborne laser scanning (ALS) simulator is presented by Lohani and Mishra
(2007) for use in research and education. Their tool comes with a user-friendly graphical
user interface (GUI) and allows selecting diﬀerent scanner and trajectory conﬁgurations.
This simulator models the laser ray as an inﬁnitesimal beam with zero divergence to simplify
the ray tracing procedure. The scene is represented by a 2.5D elevation raster, which allows
only a simpliﬁed representation of the Earth’s surface.
In a diﬀerent application, the interactions between laser beams and forest canopies are
investigated by Goodwin et al. (2007), Holmgren et al. (2003) and Lovell et al. (2005). They
present approaches of combining 3D forest modelling and ALS simulation using ray tracing.
As in Lohani and Mishra (2007), their simulators all model the laser beam as an inﬁnite
straight line, which intersects the scene in one distinct point.
Full-waveform laser scanners can record the full waveform of the backscattered signal,
providing information about the objects in a scene that are illuminated by the conic beam.
This waveform from a ﬁnite footprint was speciﬁcally simulated by Ranson and Sun (2000)
in the forestry context and by Tulldahl and Steinvall (1999) for airborne LiDAR bathymetry.
Morsdorf et al. (2007) use the ray tracing software POV-Ray2 to model the waveform of laser
scans of a 3D tree model from a combination of intensity and depth images.
Kukko and Hyypp¨a (2009) aim for a more complete and universal LiDAR simulator
that considers platform and beam orientation, pulse transmission depending on power dis-
tribution and laser beam divergence, beam interaction with the scene, and full-waveform
recording. Their approach models the physics involved in LiDAR measurements in high de-
tail, and is demonstrated for a use case in forestry. Similar to the work by Lohani and Mishra
(2007), they use 2.5D elevation maps to represent the scene. This makes the simulator useful
for airborne simulations over terrain or building models, where the scene is scanned from
above and scene elements are assumed to be solid and opaque. However, it is less suited
for penetrable 3D objects such as vegetation or overhanging geometries, especially for the
simulation of ground-based acquisitions which are less in a bird’s-eye view perspective. Kim
et al. (2012) present a similarly detailed simulator, which includes radiometric simulation
and recording of the waveform and includes explicit 3D object representations. It is unclear
if it also supports static platforms such as TLS.
TLS simulations are the sole focus of some studies for speciﬁc applications, such as leaf
area index inversion (Wang et al., 2013) or TLS measurement error quantiﬁcation (Hodge,
2http://www.povray.org/
4

Publication
Platforms
Beam
div.
FWF
Scene
Comments
North (1996),
North et al. (2010)
satellite
✓
✓
3D
FLIGHT model
Lewis (1999)
ALS
✓
✓
3D
used by
Calders et al. (2013) &
Disney et al. (2010)
Tulldahl and Steinvall
(1999)
ALS
✓
✓
3D
for bathymetry
Ranson and Sun
(2000)
ALS
(nadir)
✓
✓
3D
Holmgren et al. (2003)
ALS
3D
Goodwin et al. (2007)
ALS
3D
LITE model
Lohani and Mishra
(2007)
ALS
2.5D
Morsdorf et al. (2007)
ALS
✓
✓
3D
using POVray
Kim et al. (2009)
ALS
3D
Kukko and Hyypp¨a
(2009)
ALS, MLS
✓
✓
2.5D
Hodge (2010)
TLS
✓
✓
2.5D
Kim et al. (2012)
ALS
✓
✓
3D
Wang et al. (2013)
TLS
3D
Gastellu-Etchegorry
et al. (2015)
satellite,
ALS, TLS
✓
✓
3D
DART model
Bechtold and H¨oﬂe
(2016)
ALS, TLS,
MLS, ULS
✓
✓
3D
HELIOS
Table 1: Overview of virtual laser scanning simulators and associated publications. For each simulator, a
check mark (✓) is added if they support simulation of ﬁnite (non-zero) beam divergence (”Beam div.”) and
full waveforms (”FWF”). Scene representation may be in full 3D or 2.5D, i.e. raster-based.
5

2010). While Wang et al. (2013) use a more simple model assuming no beam divergence, the
simulation described by Hodge (2010) includes both the modelling of beam divergence and
recording of the waveform. Their simulation again uses 2.5D elevation models to represent
the scene, which is appropriate for their particular objective of error quantiﬁcation in high-
resolution, short-range TLS of natural surfaces, speciﬁcally ﬂuvial sediment deposits, of
small scenes (area of 1 m × 1 m).
Established Monte-Carlo ray tracing simulator are used and being extended for airborne
and satellite laser scanning simulations. The librat model (Calders et al., 2013; Disney et al.,
2009; Disney et al., 2010), a modular development of ARARAT (Lewis and Muller, 1993)
is such a Monte-Carlo simulator. Similarly, North et al. (2010) extend the 3D radiative
transfer model FLIGHT (North, 1996) to model satellite LiDAR waveforms. Monte-Carlo
methods represent a simple, robust and versatile set of techniques to solve multi-dimensional
problems by repeatedly sampling from a probability density function describing the system
that is investigated (Disney et al., 2000). These stochastic methods are useful for simulating
multi-scattering processes, e.g. for modeling canopy reﬂectance. The main drawback of
Monte-Carlo ray tracing methods are high computation times to simulate suﬃcient photons
for the scattering model to converge to an accurate solution (Disney et al., 2000; Gastellu-
Etchegorry et al., 2016). The LiDAR extension of the Discrete Anisotropic Radiative Trans-
fer (DART) model attempts to alleviate these restrictions by quickly selecting scattering
directions of simulated photons using the so-called Box method and modeling their prop-
agation and interaction using a Ray Carlo method, which combines classical Monte-Carlo
and ray tracing methods (Gastellu-Etchegorry et al., 2016).
A comprehensive review of simulators for the generation of point cloud data, including
LiDAR simulators, is presented in Schlager et al. (2020) with focus on their applicability to
generate data in the context of driver assistance systems and autonomous driving vehicles.
In this context, they analyse algorithms with respect to their ﬁdelity, operating principles,
considered eﬀects and possible improvements.
In contrast to most of the previously mentioned approaches, HELIOS++ provides a
framework for full 3D laser scanning simulation with multiple platforms (terrestrial (TLS),
mobile (MLS), UAV-borne (ULS) and airborne (ALS)), and a ﬂexible system to represent
scenes, which allows combination of input data from multiple sources and data formats
(Figure 1). The simulation of beam divergence and full waveform recording are supported.
While HELIOS++ may not be as realistic in terms of physical accuracy regarding the
energy budget of a single laser shot as, e.g., DART, it provides a sensible trade-oﬀbetween
computational eﬀorts and resulting point cloud quality.
Users can simulate VLS over a
large range of scales, and even combine diﬀerent scales in one scene. For example, a highly
detailed tree model with individual leaves might be placed in a forest scene represented by
(transmissive) voxels (Weiser et al., 2021), while using a rasterised digital terrain model
as ground surface. This allows to model the inﬂuence of the surrounding of a particular
object of interest on the derived VLS point clouds.
Furthermore, HELIOS++ aims for
high usability by providing a comprehensible set of parameters, while not overwhelming the
users with options. These parameters represent the state of the art and are supported by
peer-reviewed literature. Since HELIOS++ can be used from the command line and from
6

within Python, workﬂows integrating HELIOS++ can be easily scripted and automated, as
well as linked to external software (e.g. GIS, 3D point cloud processing software, Jupyter
Notebooks, and others).
HELIOS++ comes with an extensive documentation of all algorithms that are used in
the simulations, including examples and references to the relevant literature describing the
implemented methods. Furthermore, the open source implementation allows any user to
i) inspect and ii) alter/adapt the source code of the program. For ease of use, we provide
pre-compiled versions that are ready to use for major operating systems (Microsoft Windows
10 and Debian Linux 10.7 Buster), and the option to use Python as a scripting language to
create, manipulate and simulate VLS data acquisition with HELIOS++.
3. Implementation of HELIOS++
This section introduces the concepts and interfaces of HELIOS++, for which the im-
portant components are the overall architecture and modules (Section 3.1), platforms (Sec-
tion 3.2), scanners and laser beam deﬂectors (Section 3.3), the waveform simulation (Sec-
tion 3.4), input formats (Section 3.5) and output formats (Section 3.6), and the aspect of
randomness and repeatability of results (Section 3.7).
3.1. Architecture and modules
The central element in HELIOS++ simulations is a survey. A survey contains links to
the scene, which deﬁnes the objects that are scanned, the platform, on which the virtual
scanner is mounted and moved through the scene, and to the scanner itself. Furthermore,
a survey contains a number of legs, which represent waypoints for the platform. The scene
consists of a number of parts. Each part represents one input source, for example, a 3D
mesh ﬁle, or a voxel ﬁle. Multiple parts may be combined in a scene, and no limitation to
the combination of diﬀerent data source types is imposed. HELIOS++ uses internationally
accepted standard ﬁle formats for input and output. These elements are deﬁned through
Extensible Markup Language (XML) ﬁles, that are referenced using (relative) ﬁle paths.
XML is a text-based format, which can easily be manipulated using a text editor or an
XML editor. Figure 2 presents the diﬀerent ﬁles along with a subset of the parameters that
can be set in the respective ﬁles.
A survey may then be run through either i) the command line, where an executable
is provided or ii) the Python bindings pyhelios.
The Python bindings allow access to
the simulation parameters as parsed from the XML ﬁles, including changing the parameters
programmatically for each simulation run. For example, diﬀerent scanners can be exchanged
automatically and simulated in sequence in a single Python script without changing any
other input and settings of the simulation.
pyhelios furthermore allows access to the
simulation result, i.e. the point cloud and the platform trajectory, and converts them into
a NumPy array either at the end of the simulation run or through a callback function
that can be executed every n-th cast laser ray. In this way, a live preview of the point
cloud acquisition can be implemented in Python to give a visual impression of the ongoing
simulation. A Python script distributed with HELIOS++ acts as such a visualiser, and
7

Figure 2: File structure of HELIOS++ survey, scene, platform, and scanner. A survey consists of one or
more legs, and a single scanner, platform, and scene, respectively. A scene is built up from one or more
parts, which can be of diﬀerent data type.
is called with the same commands as the standalone executable. A user may thus quickly
switch between using the pure C++ implementation without visualisation or the Python
bindings with visualisation, as presented in Listing 1.
Listing 1: Comparison between running HELIOS++ as an executable and through the Python wrapper
providing an interactive viewer
1 run\helios.exe data\surveys\arbaro_demo.xml --lasOutput --
,→writeWaveform
2 python pyhelios\helios.py data\surveys\arbaro_demo.xml --
,→lasOutput --writeWaveform
With pyhelios, it is also possible to combine HELIOS++ with tools like Jupyter Note-
books, allowing for explanations along-side code and ﬁgures. We include sample notebooks
in the documentation of HELIOS++. One of these samples is shown in Figure 3.
3.2. Supported laser scanning platforms
Both static and dynamic platforms are supported by HELIOS++, which can resemble
an airplane (LinearPath platform), a multicopter (Multicopter platform), a ground-based
vehicle (GroundVehicle platform) or a static tripod (Static platform). In the case of the
LinearPath platform, the vehicle is moved with a constant speed from one waypoint (leg)
to the next one. The orientation of the platform is always towards the next waypoint. The
Multicopter platform additionally simulates acceleration and deceleration of the platform.
In the turn mode smooth, the platform banks to make more smooth turns at the waypoints
8

Figure 3: Screenshot of a Jupyter Notebook showcasing the Python bindings of HELIOS++ by plotting the
trajectory of a simulation over ﬂat terrain.
9

instead of stopping and turning on the spot. This mode simulates the banked angle turns
available in the ﬂight protocols of major drone companies (e.g. DJI). Custom yaw angles
for the beginning and the end of each leg can be provided. The GroundVehicle platform
is bound to elements of the scene deﬁned as ground in the respective material ﬁle (cf.
Section 3.5). Furthermore, it considers maximum turn radii and implements three-point-
turns to resemble a car or tractor on which a scanner is mounted (i.e. MLS). The diﬀerent
platforms and scene types (Section 3.5) are shown in Figure 1.
As expected, choice of
platform inﬂuences the resulting pointcloud, which is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Point clouds resulting from virtual laser scanning of the scene shown in Figure 1, using (a) an
airplane, (b) a multicopter, (c) a ground vehicle and (d) a static tripod as platform. Since HELIOS++
records which objects are generating which return, the points can be perfectly assigned to the objects, here
illustrated by distinct colouring.
3.3. Supported laser scanners and scan deﬂectors
The core component of the simulation is the laser scanner, which includes a model for
the scan deﬂector. The choice of the deﬂector inﬂuences the resulting scan pattern (Fig. 5).
HELIOS++ supports polygonal mirror deﬂection, resulting in parallel scan lines with
even point density (Fig. 5a), ﬁbre-optics, where the beam is fed through ﬁbreoptic cables
to point in diﬀerent directions, resulting in a similar scan pattern to (a), but without the
need of mechanically moving parts (Fig. 5b), a swinging mirror, which results in a zig-zag-
pattern with increased point densities at the extrema (Fig. 5c) and rotating slanted mirrors,
resulting in a conical point pattern at a constant scan angle oﬀ-nadir, also referred to as
Palmer scanner (Fig. 5d).
3.4. Waveform simulation
During real LiDAR acquisitions, a laser beam sent out from the laser scanner has a ﬁnite
footprint, i.e. a non-zero area that intersects with the scene. For every inﬁnitesimal point
10

Figure 5: Diﬀerent scan patterns depending on the deﬂector used in the simulation: a) rotating mirror, b)
ﬁbre-optic line scanner, c) oscillating mirror and d) slanted rotating mirror (Palmer scanner). The patterns
shown here result from simulations with HELIOS++ using the respective deﬂectors, albeit with unrealistic
settings of pulse repetition rate and scanning frequency, in order to show the patterns more clearly.
in this area, energy is transmitted back to the detector where it is recorded as the integral
of intensities over the area. By considering this received intensity over time, it is possible
to extract multiple echoes from one laser pulse, corresponding to multiple targets that were
hit by parts of the intersection area, respectively.
In HELIOS++, the non-zero beam divergence is simulated by subrays, that are sampled
in a regular pattern around the central ray (Fig. 6). Every subray has its own base intensity,
which is calculated according to Equation 1, representing a 2D Gaussian power distribution
(Carlsson et al., 2001).
I = I0 exp
 −2r2/w2
(1)
11

where I0 [W] is the peak power, w [m] the local beam divergence and r [m] the radial
distance from the power maximum, i.e. the ray centre. w is calculated using Equation 2
from the beam waist radius w0 [m], and the helper values ω =
λR
πw2
0 and ω0 = λR0
πw2
0 with λ
[nm] as the wavelength, R [m] the range of the target and R0 [m] the focusing length of the
laser.
w = w0
q
ω2
0 + ω2
(2)
Every subray is individually cast into the scene and intersected with objects. If it hits
an object, a return is generated and recorded by the detector. The respective subray does
not continue in the scene through transmission or reﬂection. In the case of the transmissive
voxel model (cf. Section 3.5), a subray may either fully traverse a voxel or produce a return,
but never both. Therefore, the property of transmissivity of a scene part is coupled to the
use of multiple subrays. The power returned from the object is further dependent on the
material speciﬁed in the scene deﬁnition (Section 3.5).
The number of subrays generated can be set by the user by providing the
beamSampleQuality parameter in the XML ﬁle of the scanner or the survey. The beamSampleQuality
corresponds to the number of concentric circles where subrays are sampled. For each circle,
the number of subrays is deﬁned as ⌊2πi⌋where i = 1, . . . ,beamSampleQuality is the circle
index. This ensures that the angular distance between adjacent subrays is approximately
constant, i.e. each subray represents a solid angle of equal size. A central subray is always
added. Figure 6 shows the subray distribution for three diﬀerent beam sample qualities.
Figure 6: Subray conﬁgurations for beam sample qualities of (a) 2 (7 subrays), (b) 5 (93 subrays), and (c)
9 (279 subrays). The colour of the subrays corresponds to the normalised intensity at this location within
the beam cone: low (purple) to high (yellow). The black circle represents the single beam divergence (at
the 1/e2 points, here: 0.3 mrad), the gray circle twice the beam divergence.
The pulse shape in time is approximated using bins of a regular, user-deﬁned size via the
parameter binWidth_ns. Each bin’s power is calculated according to Equation 3, where t
[ns] is the time and τ [ns] is the pulse length of the scanner divided by 1.75 (Carlsson et al.,
2001). I [W] is calculated for each subray according to Equation 1.
P(t) = I
 t
τ
2
exp

−t
τ

(3)
12

For every pulse, the subrays are collected as a representation of the full returned wave-
form, and the recorded power for each bin is taken as the sum of the subray’s waveforms,
shifted according to the diﬀerent ranges of the subrays. Range diﬀerence is converted to
time diﬀerence by using the speed of light as a constant (c = 299,792,458 m s−1). A local
maximum ﬁlter is then used on the summed waveform to detect peaks, which are regarded
as echoes and exported as points. Optionally, a Gaussian may be ﬁtted to the resulting
waveform, to get a measure of echo width (i.e. standard deviation of the Gaussian). The
position of the point along the range (time) axis, however, is taken from the local maximum,
not from the ﬁtted Gaussian, as the outgoing waveform (Eq. 3) is not Gaussian.
3.5. Input scene models
HELIOS++ supports data formats that are (de-facto) standards in the ﬁeld, and can
be created and manipulated with free software such as QGIS3, CloudCompare4, Blender5 or
AmapVOX6.
3.5.1. Wavefront objects
In wavefront object ﬁles (ﬁle extension .obj), meshes are represented as lists of triangles
(triples of point IDs) and points (triples of coordinates). This allows opaque 3D models
of arbitrary complexity. In addition, material properties can be assigned to the objects in
so-called material ﬁles (ﬁle extension .mtl; Wavefront Technologies, 1992).
3.5.2. GeoTIFF models
Raster models created with common GIS tools, such as a digital elevation or a digital
surface model, can be included. The raster is converted to a triangular mesh on import,
where the pixel centres are interpreted as points. Invalid pixels (i.e. no-data values) are
ignored in the triangulation, resulting in holes in the mesh. This data type allows an simple
representation of the Earth’s surface. As prescribed by the ﬁle format, only 2.5D-data is
supported.
3.5.3. Point clouds
In ASCII xyz ﬁles, point clouds can be used as a raw input to HELIOS++. On import,
the point clouds are voxelised using a voxel size deﬁned by the user. In addition, a normal
vector used for intensity calculation can be assigned to the voxels (by nearest neighbour or
mean reducing) or calculated from the point cloud on the spot (cf. Section 5). Alternatively,
all laser rays can be set to have an incidence angle of 0◦, or the rays are intersected with the
actual faces of the cube representing the voxel. Material properties can be deﬁned in the
respective scene part deﬁnition of the XML ﬁle.
3https://qgis.org/en/site/
4https://www.danielgm.net/cc/
5https://www.blender.org/
6Vincent et al. (2017), http://amap-dev.cirad.fr/projects/amapvox
13

3.5.4. Transmissive voxels
Especially for modelling vegetation, we include support for voxel data containing plant
area density information (e.g. created using the AmapVOX software (Vincent et al., 2017),
ﬁle extension .vox). Multiple modes are supported in this case:
• opaque voxels, where the voxels are represented by solid cubes with a ﬁxed side length
equal to voxel resolution,
• adaptive scaling of opaque voxel cubes (with optional random but reproducible shift
to avoid regular patterns in the result), where the scaling (side length of a voxel a) is
dependent on the plant area density PAD, the user-deﬁned scaling factor α, the base
voxel size a0 and the maximum PAD, related by Equation 4, and
• transmissive voxels (explained in more detail in the following).
Point clouds resulting from a tree simulation using these diﬀerent modes are shown in
Figure 7. The opaque voxel models also support the deﬁnition of material properties through
the scene part’s deﬁnition. A comprehensive study on the eﬀects of diﬀerent levels of detail
in modelling forests using the ﬁrst two modes on the extraction of forestry and point cloud
parameters is performed by Weiser et al. (2021).
a = a0

PAD
PADmax
α
(4)
Here, a is the side length of the resulting cube, a0 the base voxel size, PAD the plant
area density of each individual voxel, PADmax a maximum value for the plant area density
and α a user-deﬁned scaling factor.
The transmissive voxels use an extinction approach as presented by North (1996). The
extinction coeﬃcient σ is calculated following Equation 5:
σ = µL
2π
Z 2π
0
gL |Ω′ · ΩL| dΩL
(5)
Here, µL is the plant area density (PAD) as deﬁned in the .vox ﬁle, gL is the probability
taken from the leaf angle distribution at direction L, and |Ω′ · ΩL| is the cosine of the angle
between the incident ray Ω′ and the direction ΩL. This leaf angle distribution is supplied via
a look-up-table as shown in Table 2, and examples for planophile, erectophile, plagiophile,
extremophile, spherical and uniform distributions are provided.
Subsequently, a random number R is drawn from a uniform distribution ∈[0, 1). The
expectation of the intersection of a subray with a voxel given the extinction coeﬃcient σ is
then given as in Equation 6, where s is the distance of an echo after entering the voxel (i.e.
traversed distance).
s = −ln(R)
σ
(6)
If the actual length of the subray traversing the voxel is larger than s, no echo is recorded
for this ray in the voxel, and it is assumed to have transmitted through the voxel, potentially
14

Figure 7: VLS point cloud of a tree based on diﬀerent voxel modes, using a UAV as a platform. Point clouds
are simulated using input voxel models with diﬀerent ﬁxed sizes (a-c), PAD-dependent scaled voxels (d and
e) and transmissive voxels (f).
intersecting the next voxel or another object. Otherwise, an echo is created at distance s
from where the subray ﬁrst entered the respective voxel, and the subray is not continued
through the scene (North, 1996).
Irrespective of the input type, each scene part can be individually scaled, rotated and
translated within the scene, allowing the re-use of models to create multiple instances of
similar objects. These transformations can also be manipulated using the Python bindings.
For rotations, both extrinsic (”global”, ﬁxed coordinate axes) and intrinsic (”local”, rotating
coordinate axes) modes are supported.
HELIOS++ allows arbitrary combinations of all possible object models in a scene. For
example, a GeoTIFF can be used as digital terrain model on which a vehicle is moving,
combined with transmissive voxel models of trees, mesh models for tree stems and a point
cloud of buildings, which is voxelised by HELIOS++ (Figure 1). Such combination allows
highly versatile use of the scene deﬁnition, while considering shadowing and overlapping
eﬀects between the diﬀerent types of object models, and is one of the key advantages over
other VLS software.
15

3.6. Output format and options
The simulated point clouds can be written either as LAS ﬁle (Version 1.0, point format 1),
according to the format deﬁnition by the American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing (ASPRS, 2011), as LAZ ﬁle, which is a lossless compression of LAS provided by the
LASzip library7, or as ASCII ﬁle, where the point coordinates and attributes are written in
columns. The LAS/LAZ formats allow for smaller ﬁle sizes and faster read/write access (cf.
Section 5.4), while the ASCII format can be parsed by any program working with text ﬁles.
In addition to creating compressed LAS ﬁles, HELIOS++ can also compress output
ASCII ﬁles, if smaller output sizes are required. Uncompressing LAZ or compressed ASCII
ﬁles is possible by invoking HELIOS++ using the --unzip ﬂag.
In the simulation of full waveforms (see Section 3.4), the echo width is optionally es-
timated for every recorded return.
Since this estimation uses a non-linear least squares
method and is hence expensive to calculate, the estimation has to be switched on explicitly
by the user. In typical use cases, this increases the runtime of the simulation by a factor of
1.3.
If the full waveform is to be exported, a separate ASCII ﬁle will be written. This ﬁle
contains information about every beam that generated at least one hit consisting in the beam
origin and the beam direction, as well as the sampled returned waveform. The bin size as well
as the maximum length of this sampled waveform can be deﬁned by the user (Section 3.4).
To connect the point cloud output with the full waveform output, the point cloud has an
attribute fullwaveIndex, which corresponds to the fullwaveIndex in the ASCII waveform
output. Multiple points, if coming from the same beam, may have the same fullwaveIndex.
The output created by HELIOS++ can be easily converted to standard waveform formats
such as PulseWaves and LAS 1.4 WDP.
Furthermore, HELIOS++ comes with an option to export the trajectory of the platform.
The time interval between successive platform positions can be deﬁned by the user in the
survey XML ﬁle. In addition to the time and the position of the platform, the attitude
angles of roll, pitch and yaw are exported.
3.7. Randomness and repeatability
The trajectory of the platform, the scanner deﬁnitions and the ray-scene interactions
with the exception of transmissive voxels are deterministic. To allow for more realistic point
clouds, random noise sources may be introduced at various points of the simulation. A
single distance measurement is attributed with a random ranging error, drawn from a normal
distribution with parameters deﬁned for each scanner. Additionally, random platform noise
can be added to simulate trajectory estimation or scan position localisation errors.
By
default, the system time is used to generate randomness, which results in diﬀerent outcomes
for every simulation run. However, the ability to produce the identical results in repeated
simulation runs is a major advantage of VLS over real data acquisitions and may be aspired
for certain use cases. To allow for repeatable survey results while using randomness, there
7https://laszip.org/, Isenburg (2013)
16

are additional options to deﬁne a custom seed for pseudo-randomness generation. Still, when
using multithreading, each thread accesses the randomness generator in a non-deterministic
order, resulting in diﬀerent outputs for every simulation run. This can be avoided by running
HELIOS++ in single-threaded mode and with a ﬁxed seed. This will generate the exact
same result in repeated runs, even for transmissive voxels, as the random number drawn
from the uniform distribution is also created based on the seed.
4. Applications of laser scanning simulation
To investigate the usability of the HELIOS++ concept of providing a sensible trade-oﬀ
between physical reality and computational complexity, along with the support of generic
input ﬁles to create the 3D scene, we present applications of laser scanning simulation. This
literature survey is based on studies that use HELIOS++’s predecessor, HELIOS (Bechtold
and H¨oﬂe, 2016) or pre-release versions of HELIOS++. Since the functionality of HELIOS,
apart from the visualisation module, is fully integrated in HELIOS++, the publications
presented in the following provide an adequate review of simulation applications.
The analysis is conducted on all publications that cite the original publication of Bechtold
and H¨oﬂe (2016), and that actively use HELIOS in their research according to the published
article. It consists of journal papers, conference contributions and posters. The following
questions are posed to analyse the contents of each publication.
• What is the scientiﬁc target of the simulation?
• How many simulations are carried out on which platform (ALS, TLS, ULS, MLS)?
• Which type of model is employed to compose the scene for the simulation?
• Which parameters are extracted from the point cloud, if applicable?
• What is the resulting VLS point cloud compared to?
The synthesis of the literature review allows a grouping of the publications and of the
purposes of laser scanning simulation into four main categories: (1) optimising or analysing
diﬀerent scan settings and acquisition modes, (2) comparing parameters extracted from sim-
ulated data to error-free ground truth, (3) generating training data for supervised machine
learning, and (4) testing and development of novel or future algorithms and sensors.
4.1. Data acquisition planning and scan setting eﬀects
Data acquisition planning at its core is an optimisation problem. The goal is to acquire
data that is ﬁt for the purpose of the analysis by minimal eﬀort. This can be a minimum
number of scan positions, ﬂight lines, etc., that is suﬃcient for the speciﬁc requirement to
the data, such as coverage of the scene regarding occlusion or a certain point density. While
ﬂight planning tools and visibility analysis-based methods can be used to create potential
acquisition plans, they usually lack methods to verify the ﬁtness for use of obtained data.
With virtual laser scanning, assuming that at least a coarse model of the area of interest
is available, a 3D point cloud can be generated and tested for its ﬁtness directly in the
17

planned application. There is no need to deﬁne proxy metrics like target point density,
required accuracy and overlap as required by simple survey planning tools. This way, users
can ensure that the acquired data will meet all requirements such as coverage, adequate
representation of geometry, and resolution before actually going to the ﬁeld to collect the
data, by running their analyses on the simulated point clouds and interpreting the results.
Similarly, the eﬀects of diﬀerent scan settings on parameters extracted from the simulated
point clouds can be studied with HELIOS++, as single variables can easily be manipulated
in a way that is isolated from all other inﬂuences, including environmental inﬂuences, which
are very diﬃcult to control in repeated real-world acquisitions. For example, the eﬀects of
ﬂying height and maximum scan angle on the resulting ground point density and resolution
(i.e. illuminated area per beam) may be analysed. Similarly, TLS scans of diﬀerent resolution
can be simulated and the eﬀect of resolution on the results of data analysis (e.g. the quality
of extraction of tree stems) can be quantiﬁed.
While the quality of the simulation in terms of being physically realistic highly depends on
the input models, even a coarse model can be useful to estimate occlusion and resulting point
densities. Such analyses, carried out prior to real data acquisitions, can save valuable time
in the ﬁeld. Using a Monte-Carlo approach, multiple simulations using diﬀerent parameters
are carried out to create the optimal (in terms of number of positions, time, etc.) acquisition
plan.
Existing publications in this category include Backes et al. (2020), who use a digital
surface model created from photogrammetry to simulate acquisition of an alpine valley by
TLS and ULS. They estimate the minimal detectable change, to optimise scan positions and
trajectories for change analysis. Similar analyses, but with focus on resulting point density
and completeness of data acquisition, are carried out based on a DEM provided by public
agencies by Lin and Wang (2019). They are able to show that a downsampled scene model
can provide accurate measures for simulated point densities when also reducing the pulse
frequency. This validates the simulation’s representation of spatial scales.
A validation of scan position planning based on viewshed analysis is carried out with
respect to achieved accuracy, point density and completeness by Previtali et al. (2019).
Their use cases are acquisitions of complex archaeological sites, where complete coverage is
often diﬃcult to achieve due to occlusions. In two examples, they optimise the positions of
97 and 16 scan positions, respectively, to scan a basilica and part of an ancient food storage
in Italy.
The eﬀect of scan settings on point cloud-based parameters is analysed for forestry set-
tings by H¨ammerle et al. (2017), who extract understory tree heights from TLS and ULS
data. They use 3D models created with the Arbaro tree generator8, on which they densely
sample points to create a reference point cloud as ground truth. They ﬁnd a favourable
trade-oﬀbetween acquisition eﬀort and accuracy of results for a number of three TLS scan
positions around a tree object of interest (H¨ammerle et al., 2017). Similarly, Li et al. (2020)
create 3D tree models using ONYXTREE9 and evaluate the inﬂuence of scan parameters
8http://arbaro.sourceforge.net/ (Weber and Penn, 1995)
9http://www.onyxtree.com/
18

on extracted values of diameter at breast height (DBH), tree height, stem curve and crown
volume. They succeed in reducing the root-mean-squared error on these values by iteratively
adapting scan parameters.
Weiser et al. (2021) analyse the diﬀerent opaque voxel models at diﬀerent scales and
their eﬀect on common tree metrics, showing that a scaled voxel model requires much less
complexity (i.e., allows for a larger voxel size) than binary voxels at a ﬁxed scale. Sch¨afer
et al. (2019) use the novel transmissive voxel-support of HELIOS++ for similar analyses
with ALS and ULS data.
4.2. Algorithm and method evaluation: validation and calibration
In numerous point cloud analysis methods, the objective is to extract certain parameters
describing the objects of interest. For example, in forestry applications, ALS and TLS point
clouds are commonly used to derive the diameter at breast height of trees, crown radii, tree
heights, and tree species (Giannetti et al., 2018). To calibrate the extraction algorithms as
well as to validate the results, in-situ measurements are required, which are laborious and
costly to acquire, and not free of error.
An alternative to this in-situ data acquisition can be provided by HELIOS++, if the
parameters to be extracted from the point cloud can be derived from the objects within
the scene, or the scene is created dynamically according to the parameters. For example, a
method may be designed to measure DBH from a point cloud. In VLS, the true values of
DBH can be derived from the stem models, or the virtual tree models themselves may be
generated according to given values of DBH. In addition to being error-free, the domain of
the parameters (e.g. the range of DBH values) used in the simulation can be deﬁned by the
user. A simulated example can therefore be picked to have exactly the properties needed in
a speciﬁc application (say, use case-speciﬁc DBH values between 20 cm to 25 cm), whereas
real objects with the required properties as ground truth may be hard to ﬁnd.
In addition to parameter extraction, perfect ground truth can be used to evaluate the
performance of classiﬁcation algorithms. Currently, classiﬁcation methods are diﬃcult to
compare, as authors use diﬀerent evaluation approaches, mainly due to the lack of semantic
reference data. Since in VLS the interaction between the laser beam and the scene can be
attributed to the exact mesh face that is hit during ray casting, and therefore to a speciﬁc
object, the ground truth data is free of error even in highly complex and multi-echo sce-
narios. This has compelling advantages: First, reference data can be created automatically,
drastically cutting costs and providing the possibility of generating massive amounts. And
second, it removes labelling errors, as manual labelling will always include some degree of
human error.
Considerable research using HELIOS to validate or calibrate extracted parameters has
been undertaken in multiple forestry applications. Liu et al. (2019a) and Liu et al. (2019b)
estimated leaf angles on trees, where ground truth is practically impossible to obtain, because
in real settings, leaves are continuously moving due to wind. VLS allows to validate their
approach of leaf angle estimation and subsequently apply it to real data. Wang et al. (2020)
validate their calculation of photon recollision probability over spatial locations using VLS
data. Zhu et al. (2020) use two diﬀerent methods to assess Leaf Area Index (LAI) and
19

compare these methods with ground truth obtained from the object models, allowing them
a comparison with the true LAI of the input objects. For tree segmentation, ground truth is
also diﬃcult to obtain, as tree canopies often intersect each other. By using HELIOS, Wang
(2020) and Xiao et al. (2019) obtain perfect ground truth for training and validation of their
segmentation methods. Wang (2020) achieve 2.9 % and 19.8 % RMSE for tree height and
crown diameter estimates.
In a non-forestry application, road curves are reconstructed and the reconstruction is
compared with the model parameters (Zhang et al., 2019), achieving a relative accuracy
of 0.6 % in circle radii estimation using VLS data. Requirements for Building Information
Modelling (BIM) are evaluated by (Rebolj et al., 2017), who generate around 100 point
clouds to ascertain the inﬂuence of parameter values.
They deﬁne accuracy criteria for
the successful identiﬁcation of building elements in the scans. Bechtold et al. (2016) test
a segmentation tool for rock outcrops by using HELIOS as a simulator. They show the
value of simulated test data for method development by easily generating point clouds with
diﬀerent occlusions and scan settings, resulting in a multitude of point densities and point
patterns.
4.3. Method training
With the advent of neural networks as supervised machine learning method in geospatial
domains, the need for training data has grown almost indeﬁnitely. While raster-based ap-
proaches can make use of existing pre-trained networks by domain transfer (Pires de Lima
and Marfurt, 2019), no such networks exist for point-based deep learning such as PointNet/-
PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017).
Simulated data, though only replicating parts of reality, can be used by neural networks
to learn basic descriptors which describe point cloud neighbourhoods, e.g. planes, corners
or edges. From these descriptors, higher-level features are derived, which are subsequently
used in classiﬁcation or regression (Winiwarter et al., 2019).
Once a network has learned to represent data in form of these features, it can be adjusted
to real data by adding relatively small amounts of training data, in approaches shown to
work for the image domain (Danielczuk et al., 2019). Further research is needed on this
approach especially for point cloud data, but HELIOS++ allows easy and fast generation
of labelled training data, which does not suﬀer from ground truth errors.
As an example application of this purpose, Mart´ınez S´anchez et al. (2019) use HELIOS-
simulated data to train and evaluate a semantic classiﬁcation of an urban scene created from
OpenStreetMap10 models. The use of VLS allowed a quantiﬁcation of their classiﬁer’s total
error, which amounts to 0.5 % on simulated point clouds.
4.4. Sensing experimentation
The fourth category summarises publications concerned with the development of novel
sensors and methods, such as Park et al. (2020), who present a new Time-of-Flight sensor
10https://www.openstreetmap.org/
20

and compare its results to a HELIOS simulation. In general, the parameters of the virtual
sensors can be tuned to resemble a non-existent sensor, the performance of which can then
be simulated without the need of actually building a prototype. Especially when looking
for potential improvements of current sensors, this enables the identiﬁcation of weak links
or bottlenecks for certain use cases.
More in-depth experimentation is also conceivable, where e.g. a novel deﬂector model
shall be simulated. Due to the open-source license, a developer may take the HELIOS++
framework and would only have to implement a new deﬂection method, whereas the scene
and all other components can be used as is to run a simulation, testing the usability of the
novel deﬂector model.
Especially when considering the short lifecycle of current hardware, simulation may be
the only way to ensure ﬁtness for use of the sensor. Equivalent simulators are widely used in
remote sensing, as especially tools working with data acquired by satellites can be developed
using the simulated data, and are then ready to use as soon as the ﬁrst real data is delivered.
5. Computational considerations
Since modern laser scanners can measure millions of points per second, it is crucial to have
an eﬃcient implementation for the ray-scene intersection. In this section, we ﬁrst present
theoretical considerations on the ray tracing implemented in HELIOS++, the modelling of
vegetation and options of generating large and complex scenes. In Section 5.4, a comparison
between HELIOS++ and its predecessor HELIOS is carried out.
5.1. Ray tracing implementation using a kD-Tree
A scene S in HELIOS++ context can be mathematically described as a set of primitives,
so S = {P1, . . . , Pn}. For each primitive P its boundaries are deﬁned considering an axis-
aligned bounding box, its centroid, and the set of vertices V = {v1, . . . , vm} composing the
primitive. Each primitive supports rotation, scaling and translation together with a material
speciﬁcation deﬁning its reﬂectance and specularity. Certain primitives, such as transmissive
voxels, also support a look-up table which can be used for vegetation modelling, as explained
in Section 5.2.
The scene building process consists in generating the set of primitives composing the
scene. Multiple input sources are supported (cf. Section 3.5), so it is possible to build a
scene considering Wavefront Object ﬁles, point clouds as ASCII ﬁles specifying (X, Y, Z)
coordinates for each point, GeoTIFF ﬁles, or a custom voxel ﬁle format based on AMAPVox
(Vincent et al., 2017). When building a scene, diﬀerent sources can be considered, as each
one is associated to its own scene part. It is also possible to apply aforementioned aﬃne
transformations to an entire scene part. This can be used, for instance, to load the same
object multiple times in one scene and placing it in diﬀerent locations through translations.
Saving and loading already built scenes is relying on boost serialisation technology (Ramey,
2004).
Ray intersections are computed through a recursive search performed over a kD-Tree
containing all primitives (Bentley, 1975). Let O be the ray origin and ˆv the normalised ray
21

Beam horizontal component
Beam vertical component
Hit probability gL
1.000000
0.000000
0.424413
0.999683
0.025180
0.424682
0.998732
0.050345
0.425489
...
...
...
0.009444
0.999955
0.848789
0.000000
1.000000
0.848822
Table 2: Values from a look-up table (LUT) for the hit probability gL at a given beam direction L, represented
by horizontal and vertical component. The numbers here correspond to an erectophile distribution and are
obtained using a numerical integration method on the formulae from North (1996). The probability gL is
normalised over 2π.
direction vector. When recursively searching through the kD-Tree starting at O, ˆv is used to
consider which node must be visited until a leaf node is reached. For each recursive search
operation s, coordinates are analysed, so s ≡0 mod 3 means the X coordinate splits the
space, s ≡1 mod 3 means the Y coordinate splits the space, and s ≡2 mod 3 means the
Z coordinate splits the space. Once inside a leaf node, ray intersections with respect to each
primitive are computed. The minimum distance intersection t0 is the time the ray needed
to enter the primitive while t1 is the time the ray needed to leave it. It is possible to have
only t0 determined, as is the case for triangles, since they are only intersected once per ray.
For the special case of primitives which support multiple ray intersections, such as trans-
missive voxels, the process is repeated considering consecutive origins. Suppose we have a
transmissive voxel intersected by a ray {O1, ˆv}: If this voxel lets the ray pass through it, then
the next ray intersection will be found considering the ray {O2, ˆv}, with O2 = O1 +(t1 +ε)ˆv,
where ε is a small decimal number to assure getting out of the previously intersected prim-
itive.
5.2. Vegetation modelling: Transmissive voxels
One of the new functionalities of HELIOS++ is vegetation modelling through transmis-
sive voxel primitives. For this purpose, a look-up table for leaf angle distribution is used to
compute ray intensity with respect to a σ (cross-section) value obtained from it. The values
in this look-up table represent a hit probability gL given the horizontal and vertical com-
ponent of the beam vector (Tab. 2). The intensity I is calculated according to Equation 7
where P is the emitted power from Equation 3 (Carlsson et al., 2001), d is the distance
between ray origin and intersection point, α2 is the square of the scanner receiver diameter,
β2 is the square of the scanner beam divergence and λ is the product between atmospheric
factor and scanner eﬃciency. The σ value can be seen as function of ray direction vector
σ(ˆv), so it will have a diﬀerent value depending on ray incidence.
I ∝λσ Pα2
4πd4β2
(7)
Voxels can operate in transmissive mode. This implies the voxel will let the ray continue
and not return a signal after intersection if σ = 0.
If σ > 0, then the return of the
22

ray is randomly determined by sampling a value u from a uniform distribution ∈[0, 1)
and computing s =
−log(u)
σ
. If the value of s is greater than the distance between both
intersection points at the voxel, the ray will continue. Otherwise, the ray will stop at the
voxel. For the non-transmissive mode, only voxels with transmittance 1.0 will allow rays to
continue.
Thus, by using detailed voxels operating in transmissive mode together with an appro-
priate look-up table speciﬁcation, HELIOS++ is capable of simulating laser scanning of
vegetation from a precomputed leaf angle distribution following North (1996). To achieve
high-quality output, it is recommended to apply individual leaf angle distributions for each
vegetation type within a scene.
5.3. Strategy to handle large and complex scenes
When loading point clouds from ASCII xyz ﬁles, big ﬁles might not be entirely contain-
able in memory. For this purpose, a two-stage algorithm is used to digest point clouds of
arbitrary size. The ﬁrst stage simply ﬁnds the minimum and maximum values for each co-
ordinate and counts the total number of points. The second stage builds all necessary voxels
to represent the point cloud inside HELIOS++. For this purpose, a voxel grid is allocated.
Then, voxels which have points inside them are built as HELIOS++ primitives. For each
voxel its spatial coordinates (X, Y, Z), normal vector components (Nx, Ny, Nz) and colour
components (R, G, B) are considered, if available, as may be the case for photogrammetric
point clouds.
The colour for the voxel is computed as the average of each colour component for all
points inside the voxel. We approximate the sRGB color space by averaging the squares of
the red, green, and blue values, and taking the square root of this average as the resulting
value for the voxel. If normals are provided, the voxel normal can be determined either as
the normal of the point which is closest to the voxel centre or the average of each normal
component for all points.
In case no normal vectors are provided, HELIOS++ can estimate them using singular
value decomposition (SVD, Golub and Kahan (1965)). All points inside a voxel are con-
sidered to build a matrix of coordinates, for which singular values and singular vectors are
obtained. Then, the singular vector of the smallest singular value is the orthonormal vector
deﬁning the plane which best ﬁts the point set in terms of the smallest sum of squared
orthogonal residuals. It can hence be understood as the voxel normal vector. The normal
estimation method can be applied to the entire input point cloud in a single stage for small
point clouds. If the size of input point cloud is too big with respect to RAM, the normal
estimation is performed in batch mode, dividing the workload into smaller parts. Each batch
extracts points inside its voxels while ignoring points outside its scope.
5.4. Performance comparison
As the direct successor of HELIOS (Bechtold and H¨oﬂe, 2016), it is interesting to com-
pare the performance of HELIOS++ with the original implementation in Java. However,
HELIOS++ was not just a port of the code, but also comes with multiple computational
improvements over its predecessor. One of these improvements concerns the ability for the
23

user to better leverage accuracy at the cost of runtime, or vice versa, by setting parameters
accordingly. For some tasks, a rough, thereby faster simulation may suﬃce, whereas for
other tasks very detailed simulation is required, but smaller sample sizes can be used or long
processing times are acceptable.
Another improvement concerns the binning mechanism for the full-waveform simulation,
which is used for maxima detection even if the waveform is not written to an output ﬁle.
In HELIOS++, we use the parameters binSize_ns and maxFullwaveRange_ns for this
binning, where the bin size is used for both the outgoing pulse and the returned waveform.
To limit the impact on performance of very low-incidence rays with a high sampling quality,
the user can provide a maximum length of the recorded waveform, beyond which any further
echoes are discarded.
To compare the performances of HELIOS++ (Version 1.0.0) and HELIOS (Version 2018-
09-24), we carry out a number of simulations using diﬀerent parameter settings, and record
the runtime as well as peak memory usage.
We present three diﬀerent scenes, at three
diﬀerent complexity levels, and make use of the option in HELIOS++ to write diﬀerent ﬁle
types and to skip the echo width determination, if not required.
The ﬁrst example scenario represents an ALS survey over terrain, which is created by
loading a digital terrain model in GeoTIFF format as described in Section 3.5. Since the
GeoTIFF loader in the Java version was faulty and this version is no longer maintained, we
created a mesh in Wavefront Object format as an input for the Java version. We simulate
two ﬂight lines at an altitude of 1,500 m asl over terrain with an extent of 26 km × 17.8 km.
As scanner we use a Leica ALS50-II, and a Cessna SR-22 as platform. The scene is shown
in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Visualisation of example survey for airborne laser scanning (ALS), using a digital terrain model
as object and a standard ALS instrument as scanner. The 3”-SRTM model by the USGS is used as input
raster.
24

The second scenario represents a mobile laser scan of an urban area, where a car is
driving through downtown buildings modelled as prisms, cylinders and pyramids (Figure 9).
The trajectory of the car is 208 m long and its average speed is 20 m s−1. The scanner is an
oblique-mounted RIEGL VUX-1UAV.
Figure 9: Visualisation of example survey for mobile laser scanning (MLS), with a car driving between
objects of simple geometry. The yellow points show the acquired point cloud of scanned parts.
In the third and ﬁnal scenario, we present a TLS survey of a vegetation scene with
a large potential for multi-echoes, as it represents two trees generated with the Arbaro
Tree Simulator (Weber and Penn, 1995), scanned using a RIEGL VZ-400 from two static
positions. This simulation has a large number of geometric primitives. A visual is depicted
in Figure 10.
Each simulation scenario was carried out three times on an Intel-i9-7900 @ 3.3 GHz with
64 GB of RAM, and I/O on an SSD connected via SATA. The average runtime and memory
consumption values are given in Table 3.
In the case with largest improvement over HELIOS, runtimes of HELIOS++ are lower
by 83 % (TLS) while using only 6 % of the previously required memory. Especially for large
scenes, the issue of memory footprint has been a limiting factor for the usability of HELIOS.
In the case of the ALS scene, the memory consumption can be reduced by 66 %, from more
than 6 GB to just above 2 GB, with a runtime reduction of 51 %. For the MLS scene using
the simple geometric shapes, the reduced processing overhead leads to a reduction of 96 % in
memory usage and 76 % in runtime. From these results we deduce a signiﬁcant improvement
both in runtime and memory footprint when comparing any conﬁguration of HELIOS++
to the previous Java version.
6. Conclusions
With HELIOS++, we present an open-source laser scanning simulation framework that
enables highly performant virtual laser scanning (VLS). In its C++ implementation and with
25

HELIOS (Java)
Version 2018-09-24
HELIOS++
Version 1.0.0
Echo width
✓
✓
Waveform output
✓
✓
✓
File format
XYZ
XYZ
XYZ
LAS
Scene 1
(ALS, GeoTIFF)
4,712.1 ± 613.8 s
6,570 MB
2,773.0 ± 53.8 s
2,246 MB
2,403.8 ± 18.0 s
2,246 MB
1,912.10 ± 20.22 s
2,246 MB
Scene 2
(MLS, geometric
primitives)
68.0 ± 2.3 s
560 MB
23.9 ± 0.2 s
24 MB
23.0 ± 0.3 s
24 MB
16.1 ± 0.6 s
24 MB
Scene 3
(TLS, tree models)
362.6 ± 6.7 s
5,360 MB
97.2 ± 1.3 s
314 MB
74.4 ± 1.0 s
314 MB
62.4 ± 0.3 s
314 MB
Table 3: Performance comparison of HELIOS and HELIOS++ with diﬀerent options. We use default parameters for waveform modelling
(beamSampleQuality=3 and binSize_ns=0.25; numBins=100 and numFullwaveBins=200 for HELIOS++ and HELIOS, respectively). Run-
times are average of three runs (± standard deviation), memory footprint is the highest value (maximum) during the full run.
26

Figure 10: Visualisation of example survey for terrestrial laser scanning (TLS), scanning two highly complex
tree models created using the Arbaro Tree Simulator. The yellow points show the acquired point cloud of
scanned parts.
the possibility to use the pyhelios package in Python to manipulate simulation parameters,
we opt for an eﬃcient and easy-to-use software. While physical accuracy and realism may be
superseded by complementing simulation software, HELIOS++ provides a ﬂexible solution
to balance computational requirements (runtime, memory footprint) and quality of results
(physical realism), while being easy to use and conﬁgure for users.
Diﬀerent studies using the HELIOS concept demonstrate the usefulness of virtually ac-
quired laser scanning data for analyses in diﬀerent categories of purpose. The main categories
are (a) planning of ﬂight patterns (ULS, ALS) or scan positions (TLS); (b) generation of
ground-truth data for validation of algorithms that extract parameters (i.a. for forestry)
from point clouds, (c) generation of training data for supervised machine learning, and (d)
testing and development of novel sensors and algorithms.
The novel object model of HELIOS++, the transmissive voxel, allows a stochastic sim-
ulation of penetrable objects, such as vegetation canopy, without the need for a highly
detailed 3D mesh model. Generally, HELIOS++ performs up to of 5.8 × faster than its
predecessor HELIOS on common scenes, and allows the user to omit intensive calculations
if not required (e.g. the calculation of the echo width for returned pulses).
To summarise, HELIOS++ is a versatile, easy-to-use, well documented scientiﬁc software
for virtual laser scanning simulations that provides a tool to generate VLS data, thereby
complementing data obtained by real-world laser scanning. The framework invites users to
experiment and develop new ideas, while being able to rely on established algorithms from
the literature.
27

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution of Patrick Herbers (Ruhr-Universit¨at
Bochum), for the improvement the triangle-ray intersection in C++, which helped to signif-
icantly reduce the runtime of HELIOS++.
Figures 1, 4, 5, and 8 show an airplane model CC-BY Emmanuel Beranger. Figures 1 and
4 show a house model by free3d.com user gerhald3d, and a drone model by cgtrader.com
user CGaxr.
References
ASPRS, 2011. LAS speciﬁcation. https://www.asprs.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/LAS_1_4_r13.
pdf.
Backes, D., Smigaj, M., Schimka, M., Zahs, V., Grzn´arov´a, A., Scaioni, M., 2020. River Morphology Mon-
itoring of a Small-Scale Alpine Riverbed using Drone Photogrammetry and LiDAR. ISPRS - Interna-
tional Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences XLIII-B2-2020,
1017–1024. doi:10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B2-2020-1017-2020.
Bechtold, S., H¨ammerle, M., H¨oﬂe, B., 2016. Simulated full-waveform laser scanning of outcrops for devel-
opment of point cloud analysis algorithms and survey planning: An application for the HELIOS LiDAR
simulation framework, in: Proceedings of the 2nd Virtual Geoscience Conference, Bergen, Norway, pp.
57–58. URL: http://lvisa.geog.uni-heidelberg.de/papers/2016/Bechtold_et_al_2016.pdf.
Bechtold, S., H¨oﬂe, B., 2016.
HELIOS: A Multi-Purpose LiDAR Simulation Framework for Research,
Planning and Training of Laser Scanning Operations with Airborne, Ground-Based Mobile and Stationary
Platforms. ISPRS Annals of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences III–3,
161–168. doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-III-3-161-2016.
Bentley, J.L., 1975. Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative searching. Communications
of the ACM 18, 509–517. doi:https://doi.org/10.1145/361002.361007.
Calders, K., Lewis, P., Disney, M., Verbesselt, J., Herold, M., 2013. Investigating assumptions of crown
archetypes for modelling LiDAR returns. Remote Sensing of Environment 134, 39–49. doi:10.1016/j.
rse.2013.02.018.
Carlsson, T., Steinvall, O., Letalick, D., 2001. Signature simulation and signal analysis for 3-D laser radar.
Danielczuk, M., Matl, M., Gupta, S., Li, A., Lee, A., Mahler, J., Goldberg, K., 2019. Segmenting Unknown
3D Objects from Real Depth Images using Mask R-CNN Trained on Synthetic Data, in: 2019 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 7283–7290. doi:10.1109/ICRA.2019.8793744.
Disney, M., Lewis, P., North, P., 2000. Monte Carlo ray tracing in optical canopy reﬂectance modelling.
Remote Sensing Reviews 18, 163–196. doi:10.1080/02757250009532389.
Disney, M.I., Kalogirou, V., Lewis, P., Prieto-Blanco, A., Hancock, S., Pfeifer, M., 2010. Simulating the
impact of discrete-return lidar system and survey characteristics over young conifer and broadleaf forests.
Remote Sensing of Environment 114, 1546–1560. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2010.02.009.
Disney, M.I., Lewis, P.E., Bouvet, M., Prieto-Blanco, A., Hancock, S., 2009. Quantifying Surface Reﬂectivity
for Spaceborne LiDAR via Two Independent Methods. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing 47, 3262–3271. doi:10.1109/TGRS.2009.2019268.
Gastellu-Etchegorry, J.P., Yin, T., Lauret, N., Cajgﬁnger, T., Gregoire, T., Grau, E., Feret, J.B., Lopes,
M., Guilleux, J., Dedieu, G., Malenovsk´y, Z., Cook, B., Morton, D., Rubio, J., Durrieu, S., Cazanave,
G., Martin, E., Ristorcelli, T., 2015. Discrete Anisotropic Radiative Transfer (DART 5) for Modeling
Airborne and Satellite Spectroradiometer and LIDAR Acquisitions of Natural and Urban Landscapes.
Remote Sensing 7, 1667–1701. doi:10.3390/rs70201667.
Gastellu-Etchegorry, J.P., Yin, T., Lauret, N., Grau, E., Rubio, J., Cook, B.D., Morton, D.C., Sun, G.,
2016. Simulation of satellite, airborne and terrestrial LiDAR with DART (I): Waveform simulation with
quasi-Monte Carlo ray tracing. Remote Sensing of Environment 184, 418–435. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2016.
07.010.
28

Giannetti, F., Puletti, N., Quatrini, V., Travaglini, D., Bottalico, F., Corona, P., Chirici, G., 2018. Integrat-
ing terrestrial and airborne laser scanning for the assessment of single-tree attributes in Mediterranean
forest stands. European Journal of Remote Sensing 51, 795–807. doi:10.1080/22797254.2018.1482733.
Golub, G., Kahan, W., 1965. Calculating the Singular Values and Pseudo-Inverse of a Matrix. Journal of
the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Series B Numerical Analysis 2, 205–224. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1137/0702016.
Goodwin, N.R., Coops, N.C., Culvenor, D.S., 2007. Development of a simulation model to predict LiDAR
interception in forested environments. Remote Sensing of Environment 111, 481–492. doi:10.1016/j.
rse.2007.04.001.
Hodge, R.A., 2010. Using simulated Terrestrial Laser Scanning to analyse errors in high-resolution scan
data of irregular surfaces. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 65, 227–240. doi:10.
1016/j.isprsjprs.2010.01.001.
Holmgren, J., Nilsson, M., Olsson, H., 2003. Simulating the eﬀects of LiDAR scanning angle for estimation
of mean tree height and canopy closure. Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing 29, 623–632. doi:10.5589/
m03-030.
H¨ammerle, M., Lukaˇc, N., Chen, K.C., Koma, Z., Wang, C.K., Anders, K., H¨oﬂe, B., 2017. Simulating
Various Terrestrial and UAV LiDAR Scanning Conﬁgurations for Understory Forest Structure Modelling.
ISPRS Annals of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences IV-2/W4, 59–65.
doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W4-59-2017.
Isenburg, M., 2013. LASzip: lossless compression of LiDAR data. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote
Sensing 79, 209–217. URL: https://www.cs.unc.edu/~isenburg/lastools/download/laszip.pdf.
Kim, S., Lee, I., Lee, M., 2012. LiDAR Waveform Simulation over Complex Targets. ISPRS - International
Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences XXXIX-B7, 517–522.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XXXIX-B7-517-2012.
Kim, S., Min, S., Kim, G., Lee, I., Jun, C., 2009. Data simulation of an airborne lidar system, in: Turner,
M.D., Kamerman, G.W. (Eds.), Laser Radar Technology and Applications XIV, SPIE. p. 73230C. doi:10.
1117/12.818545.
Kukko, A., Hyypp¨a, J., 2009.
Small-footprint Laser Scanning Simulator for System Validation, Error
Assessment, and Algorithm Development. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 75, 1177–
1189. doi:10.14358/PERS.75.10.1177.
Lewis, P., 1999. Three-dimensional plant modelling for remote sensing simulation studies using the Botanical
Plant Modelling System. Agronomie 19, 185–210. doi:10.1051/agro:19990302.
Lewis, P., Muller, J.P., 1993. The advanced radiometric ray tracer: Ararat for plant canopy reﬂectance
simulation. Proc. 29th Conf. Int. Soc. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 29. URL: http://www.isprs.org/
proceedings/XXIX/congress/part7/26_XXIX-part7.pdf.
Li, L., Mu, X., Soma, M., Wan, P., Qi, J., Hu, R., Zhang, W., Tong, Y., Yan, G., 2020. An Iterative-Mode
Scan Design of Terrestrial Laser Scanning in Forests for Minimizing Occlusion Eﬀects. IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 1–20doi:10.1109/TGRS.2020.3018643.
Pires de Lima, R., Marfurt, K., 2019. Convolutional Neural Network for Remote-Sensing Scene Classiﬁcation:
Transfer Learning Analysis. Remote Sensing 12, 86. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/rs12010086,
doi:10.3390/rs12010086.
Lin, C.H., Wang, C.K., 2019.
Point Density Simulation for ALS Survey, in: Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Mobile Mapping Technology (MMT2019), pp. 157–160. URL: https://www.
geog.uni-heidelberg.de/md/chemgeo/geog/gis/mmt2019-lin_and_wang_compr.pdf.
Liu, J., Skidmore, A.K., Wang, T., Zhu, X., Premier, J., Heurich, M., Beudert, B., Jones, S., 2019a. Variation
of leaf angle distribution quantiﬁed by terrestrial LiDAR in natural European beech forest. ISPRS Journal
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 148, 208–220. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2019.01.005.
Liu, J., Wang, T., Skidmore, A.K., Jones, S., Heurich, M., Beudert, B., Premier, J., 2019b. Compari-
son of terrestrial LiDAR and digital hemispherical photography for estimating leaf angle distribution in
European broadleaf beech forests. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 158, 76–89.
doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2019.09.015.
29

Lohani, B., Mishra, R.K., 2007. Generating LiDAR Data in Laboratory: LiDAR Simulator, in: ISPRS
Workshop on Laser Scanning 2007 and SilviLaser 2007, pp. 264–269. URL: https://www.isprs.org/
proceedings/XXXVI/3-W52/final_papers/Lohani_2007.pdf.
Lovell, J.L., Jupp, D., Newnham, G.J., Coops, N.C., Culvenor, D.S., 2005. Simulation study for ﬁnding
optimal LiDAR acquisition parameters for forest height retrieval. Forest Ecology and Management 214,
398–412. doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2004.07.077.
Mart´ınez S´anchez, J., V´aquez Alvarez, A., L´opez Vilarino, D., Fern´andez Rivera, F., Cabaleiro Dom´ınguez,
J.C., Fern´andez Pena, T., 2019.
Fast Ground Filtering of Airborne LiDAR Data Based on Iterative
Scan-Line Spline Interpolation. Remote Sensing 11, 2256. doi:10.3390/rs11192256.
Morsdorf, F., Frey, O., Koetz, B., Meier, E., 2007. Ray Tracing for Modeling of Small Footprint Airborne
Laser Scanning Returns. doi:10.3929/ETHZ-B-000107380.
North, P., 1996.
Three-dimensional forest light interaction model using a Monte Carlo method.
IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 34, 946–956. doi:10.1109/36.508411.
North, P.R.J., Rosette, J.A.B., Su´arez, J.C., Los, S.O., 2010.
A Monte Carlo radiative transfer model
of satellite waveform LiDAR. International Journal of Remote Sensing 31, 1343–1358. doi:10.1080/
01431160903380664.
Park, M., Baek, Y., Dinare, M., Lee, D., Park, K.H., Ahn, J., Kim, D., Medina, J., Choi, W.J., Kim,
S., et al., 2020. Hetero-integration enables fast switching time-of-ﬂight sensors for light detection and
ranging. Scientiﬁc Reports 10, 2764. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-59677-x.
Previtali, M., D´ıaz-Vilari˜no, L., Scaioni, M., Fr´ıas Nores, E., 2019. Evaluation of the Expected Data Quality
in Laser Scanning Surveying of Archaeological Sites, in: 4th International Conference on Metrology for
Archaeology and Cultural Heritage, Florence, Italy, pp. 19–24. URL: https://re.public.polimi.it/
retrieve/handle/11311/1124569/476842/Previtali%20et%20al%202019%20MetroArchaeo.pdf.
Qi, C.R., Yi, L., Su, H., Guibas, L.J., 2017. PointNet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on point sets
in a metric space, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5099–5108.
Ramey, R., 2004. C++ BOOST Serialization. URL: https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_72_0/libs/
serialization/doc/index.html.
Ranson, K.J., Sun, G., 2000.
Modeling LiDAR Returns from Forest Canopies.
IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 38, 2617–2626. doi:10.1109/36.885208.
Rebolj, D., Puˇcko, Z., Babiˇc, N.C., Bizjak, M., Mongus, D., 2017. Point cloud quality requirements for Scan-
vs-BIM based automated construction progress monitoring. Automation in Construction 84, 323–334.
doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2017.09.021.
Schlager, B., Muckenhuber, S., Schmidt, S., Holzer, H., Rott, R., Maier, F.M., Saad, K., Kirchengast, M.,
Stettinger, G., Watzenig, D., Ruebsam, J., 2020. State-of-the-Art Sensor Models for Virtual Testing
of Advanced Driver Assistance Systems/Autonomous Driving Functions. SAE International Journal of
Connected and Automated Vehicles 3, 233–261. doi:10.4271/12-03-03-0018.
Sch¨afer, J., Faßnacht, F., H¨oﬂe, B., Weiser, H., 2019.
Das SYSSIFOSS-Projekt:
Synthetische 3D-
Fernerkundungsdaten f¨ur verbesserte Waldinventurmodelle, in: 2. Symposium zur angewandten Satel-
litenerdbeoachtung, Cologne, Germany.
URL: https://www.dialogplattform-erdbeobachtung.de/
downloads/cms/Stele3/EO-Symposium_Jannika.Schaefer.pdf.
Tulldahl, H.M., Steinvall, K.O., 1999.
Analytical waveform generation from small objects in LiDAR
bathymetry. Applied optics 38, 1021–1039. doi:10.1364/ao.38.001021.
Vincent, G., Antin, C., Laurans, M., Heurtebize, J., Durrieu, S., Lavalley, C., Dauzat, J., 2017.
Mapping plant area index of tropical evergreen forest by airborne laser scanning. A cross-validation
study using LAI2200 optical sensor.
Remote Sensing of Environment 198, 254 – 266.
URL:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S003442571730233X, doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rse.2017.05.034.
Wang, D., 2020. Unsupervised semantic and instance segmentation of forest point clouds. ISPRS Journal
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 165, 86–97. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2020.04.020.
Wang, D., Schraik, D., Hovi, A., Rautiainen, M., 2020. Direct estimation of photon recollision probability
using terrestrial laser scanning. Remote Sensing of Environment 247, 111932. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2020.
30

111932.
Wang, Y., Xie, D., Yan, G., Zhang, W., Mu, X., 2013. Analysis on the inversion accuracy of LAI based
on simulated point clouds of terrestrial LiDAR of tree by ray tracing algorithm, in: IGARSS 2013-
2013 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, IEEE, Piscataway. pp. 532–535.
doi:10.1109/IGARSS.2013.6721210.
Wavefront Technologies, 1992.
Appendix B1. Object Files (.obj), Advanced Visualizer Manual.
URL:
http://fegemo.github.io/cefet-cg/attachments/obj-spec.pdf.
Weber, J., Penn, J., 1995.
Creation and rendering of realistic trees, in: Mair, S.G., Cook, R. (Eds.),
Computer graphics proceedings, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY. pp. 119–128.
doi:10.1145/218380.218427.
Weiser, H., Winiwarter, L., Fassnacht, F., H¨oﬂe, B., 2021. Opaque Voxel-based Tree Models for Virtual
Laser Scanning in Forestry Applications. In preparation.
Winiwarter, L., Mandlburger, G., Schmohl, S., Pfeifer, N., 2019. Classiﬁcation of ALS Point Clouds Using
End-to-End Deep Learning. PFG – Journal of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Geoinformation
Science URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s41064-019-00073-0, doi:10.1007/s41064-019-00073-0.
Winiwarter, L., Pena, A.M.E., Weiser, H., Anders, K., Saches, J.M., Searle, M., H¨oﬂe, B., 2021. 3dgeo-
heidelberg/helios:
Version 1.0.0.
URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4452871, doi:10.5281/
zenodo.4452871.
Xiao, W., Zaforemska, A., Smigaj, M., Wang, Y., Gaulton, R., 2019. Mean shift segmentation assessment
for individual forest tree delineation from airborne lidar data. Remote Sensing 11, 1263. doi:10.3390/
rs11111263.
Zhang, Z., Li, J., Guo, Y., Yang, C., Wang, C., 2019. 3D Highway Curve Reconstruction From Mobile Laser
Scanning Point Clouds. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , 1–11doi:10.1109/
TITS.2019.2946259.
Zhu, X., Liu, J., Skidmore, A.K., Premier, J., Heurich, M., 2020. A voxel matching method for eﬀective
leaf area index estimation in temperate deciduous forests from leaf-on and leaf-oﬀairborne LiDAR data.
Remote Sensing of Environment 240. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2020.111696.
31
