 
 
Kanika Goel(1), Fernando Rodriguez Gonzalez(1), Nico Adam(1), Javier Duro(2), Marc Gaset(2) 
 
(1) Remote Sensing Technology Institute (IMF), German Aerospace Center (DLR), Germany 
(2) Altamira Information, Spain  
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Monitoring the deformation of urban infrastructure is crucial 
for improving safety and reducing economic loss. Ground 
deformation (caused by construction, groundwater extraction 
etc.) can be measured with millimeter accuracy using advanced 
stacking techniques in differential SAR interferometry. 
However, deformation might also occur due to thermal dilation 
of complex urban objects such as buildings and bridges, 
resulting in structural stress and thus, a need for monitoring. 
High resolution SAR missions e.g. TerraSAR-X provide a 
unique 
opportunity 
to 
measure 
such 
small 
seasonal 
displacements. This paper investigates different techniques 
such as Persistent Scatterer Interferometry (PSI), Distributed 
Scatterer Interferometry (DSI), Stable Point Network (SPN) 
and Small Baseline Subset Algorithm (SBAS) for thermal 
dilation monitoring of complex urban infrastructure using X-
band SAR data. 
Index Terms— Distributed Scatterer (DS), Deformation, 
Differential 
Interferometric 
SAR 
(DInSAR), 
Persistent 
Scatterer (PS), TerraSAR-X, Thermal Dilation, Urban Areas. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Differential Interferometric SAR (DInSAR) and multitemporal 
DInSAR have proven to be very effective in mapping surface 
displacement [1]. The TerraSAR-X mission provides meter-
resolution imagery data from space and has provided a 
significant improvement in the monitoring capabilities of 
interferometric techniques [2]. Due to reduced wavelength (ca. 
3.1 cm), the data are more sensitive to small displacements, 
even those caused by thermal dilation of objects. However, 
most of the stacking algorithms, such as Persistent Scatterer 
Interferometry (PSI), estimate the deformation time series 
assuming a linear subsidence [3]. This is especially not true in 
the case of man-made structures, such as steel core bridges and 
specific buildings, which may be very sensitive to thermal 
dilation effects correlated to the temperature and may undergo 
large non-linear seasonal deformation. Thus, assumption of a 
linear model may often lead to ambiguous velocity estimates 
and decreased performance. Thus, a DInSAR stacking system 
dealing with non-linear motion has to be adapted accordingly. 
    The aim of this paper is thermal dilation monitoring of 
complex urban structures at high resolution by extending 
standard multitemporal DInSAR techniques based on 
Persistent Scatterers (PSs) and/or Distributed Scatterers (DSs) 
[3]-[7]. Focus is on the preservation of single buildings and 
transportation infrastructure such as bridges, tunnels and 
railways. The advanced processing system is demonstrated 
over the urban area of Cologne, Germany using high resolution 
spotlight TerraSAR-X data.  
2. METHODOLOGY 
The coherent stacking methods involve the simultaneous 
processing of a stack of SAR images of the same area, which 
are taken at different times, for monitoring deformation time 
series and residual topography (after compensation of a digital 
elevation model). 
    In PSI, long time stable PSs are exploited and differential 
interferograms with respect to a single master image are 
formed [3]. It provides a parametric estimation of the 3D 
location and displacement for PSs based on the assumption of 
one or two dominant scatterers in the resolution cell. Basically, 
the differential interferometric phase is composed of phase 
components due to deformation, residual topography, 
atmosphere and noise. The deformation phase for a scatterer 
with respect to a reference pixel is usually assumed to follow a 
constant velocity model and is given by: 
 
>
@
k
t
k
defo
vB
O
S
I
4
 
 
(1) 
where O is the signal wavelength, v is the displacement 
velocity of the scatterer in the line-of-sight (LOS) and 
k
tB is 
the temporal separation (i.e. temporal baseline) for k th 
interferogram. The unknown deformation parameter to be 
estimated in this case is v . This model can be extended to 
include periodic displacement induced by thermal dilation 
effects associated to temperature. The yearly temperature 
profile of an area can be approximated by a cosine function 
and the extended deformation model is given as follows: 
 


»
»
»
»
¼
º
«
«
«
«
¬
ª
°
°
¿
°°
¾
½
°
°
¯
°°
®
­
¸
¹
·
¨
©
§

¸
¹
·
¨
©
§


 
ref
ref
k
t
k
t
k
defo
t
T
t
B
T
a
vB
S
S
O
S
I
2
cos
2
cos
4
 
(2) 
where a [mm] is the amplitude of seasonal motion of the 
scatterer in radar’s LOS, T is the period of the seasonal 
THERMAL DILATION MONITORING OF COMPLEX URBAN 
INFRASTRUCTURE USING HIGH RESOLUTION SAR DATA 
954
978-1-4799-5775-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE
IGARSS 2014

 
 
displacement and is equal to one year for seasonal deformation 
caused by thermal dilation and 
ref
t
 is the time offset of the 
master (reference) acquisition. The unknown deformation 
parameters to be estimated now include v and a . 
    Additionally, it is also possible to exploit partially coherent 
DSs 
via 
techniques 
such 
as 
Distributed 
Scatterer 
Interferometry (DSI), Stable Point Network (SPN) and Small 
Baseline Subset Algorithm (SBAS). DSs also make up a 
significant percentage in X-band and considerably increase the 
measured points, as shown later in the next section.  
    In DSI, first, an adaptive spatial phase filtering is performed 
on coherent DSs [4]. The linear and seasonal deformation is 
then retrieved for each selected DS by adjusting the extended 
deformation model to the available data, similar to PSI. In 
cities, differential interferograms with respect to a single 
master image can be used, since, DSs provide a long time 
coherent radar return on man-made structures (however, for 
other applications in non-urban areas, it is better to use small-
baseline interferograms so as to limit the effects of temporal 
decorrelation).     
    The SPN technique [5], [6] also utilizes differential 
interferograms formed with respect to a single master image 
and then multilooked. Since the temperature evolution during 
the year does not follow pure cosine behavior, this algorithm 
correlates the thermal component with the air temperature 
history at the acquisition times as follows: 
 
>
@
temp
temp
k
t
k
defo
a
vB
'

 O
S
I
4
 
(3) 
where 
temp
a
 [mm/ºC] is the thermal amplitude of the scatterer 
in radar’s LOS and 
temp
'
 is the normalized temperature 
difference between the two acquisition times. The unknown 
deformation parameters to be estimated are v and 
temp
a
. 
    SBAS, meanwhile, uses unwrapped and multi-looked small-
baseline differential interferograms and estimates non-linear 
deformation of the scatterers without any modelling via the 
Singular Value Decomposition method [7]. Thus, the 
estimated deformation time series include the thermal dilation 
component of motion.  
3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The test site is the city of Cologne in Germany. The data 
comprises of 50 High Resolution Spotlight TerraSAR-X 
images from March, 2009 to December, 2010.  
    Fig. 1 shows the estimated amplitude of seasonal 
deformation for the test site using PSI. The following different 
types of urban infrastructure have been highlighted: 
3.1 Buildings 
The important buildings which have undergone seasonal 
motion have been enclosed in white rectangles. Building ‘A’ is 
the shopping center ‘Koeln Arcaden’, ‘B’ is the international 
trade fair and exhibition center ‘Koelnmesse’, ‘C’ is the indoor 
concert arena ‘Lanxess Arena’, ‘D’ is Cologne’s main railway 
station ‘Koeln Hauptbahnhof’, ‘E’ is the ‘Cologne Cathedral’ 
and is a World Heritage Site, and ‘F’ is an urban regeneration 
neighborhood ‘Media Park’ which houses companies, cultural 
institutions, a hotel and apartments. Using TerraSAR-X data, 
thermal dilation of these buildings is measurable. 
3.2 Bridges 
The bridges over river Rhine have been marked by yellow 
arrows. Bridge ‘G’ is the ‘Hohenzollernbruecke’, the most 
heavily used railway bridge in Germany. Bridge ‘H’ is the 
‘Zoobruecke’ and it further extends to both east and west of 
the river. It is the world’s most tensioned box girder bridge 
and also the busiest bridge in Cologne. Bridge ‘I’ is the 
‘Muelheimerbruecke’. Strong periodic deformation can be 
seen on the bridges, since, temperatures in Cologne can vary 
greatly between summer and winter. However, for some parts 
of the bridges, measurement point density is less. Possible 
reasons for this include river-bridge multiple bounce, double 
scatterers and non-linear displacements not related to 
temperature.  
3.3 Railways 
The ‘Line 13’ of the Cologne Stadtbahn, a light rail system, 
has been enclosed in the red rectangle ‘J’. The northern part of 
this line is built as an elevated railway and the seasonal motion 
is evident.  
    We have zoomed-in on the ‘Zoobruecke’ bridge in Fig. 2. 
The left image shows the estimated amplitudes of seasonal 
deformation using PSI. The area enclosing the ‘Zoobruecke’ 
bridge has also been processed using the DSI algorithm and 
the results are shown in the image on the right. The results for 
PSs and DSs match well with each other. More importantly, 
there is a substantial increase in the measured point density.  
    Another example illustrating ‘Hohenzollernbruecke’ and 
‘Duetzer Bruecke’ (not shown previously in Fig. 1) bridges is 
provided in Fig. 3. It shows the estimated thermal amplitudes 
for the test area using SPN. Local temperature data has been 
used instead of a cosine modelling. It is worth mentioning that 
the use of local registered temperatures instead of a cosine 
model is sometimes not an optimal solution because it can be 
difficult to get data from a station near the area of interest for 
specific SAR acquisition times. Additionally, the real 
temperature of each structure also depends on the solar 
irradiation, 
the 
materials’s 
absorbed 
solar 
radiation, 
temperature gradients and surrounding elements which locally 
affect the temperature suach as rivers or sea. Thus, the 
registered temperature can differ several degrees from the real 
temperature of the structure. The unmodeled thermal signal 
produces 
a 
residual 
in 
the 
long-term 
displacement 
measurement and a decrease in the model fitting quality.  
    Note that in all these three methods demonstrated 
previously, wherein, a deformation model is fitted to the 
available phase data, it is suggested to have at least two years 
of acquisitions for measuring thermal dilation as this improves 
the model fitting.  
    Lastly, Fig. 4 shows the mean deformation estimated using 
the SBAS technique. The area near ‘Lanxess Arena’ building 
and ‘Zoobruecke’ bridge is shown. Deformation time series is 
visualized for a point on the concert arena building. As can be 
955

 
seen, even non-linear deformation time series can be 
estimated, which includes the linear as well as seasonal 
deformation due to thermal dilation. However, SBAS is 
susceptible to phase unwrapping errors in urban areas due to 
layover, shadow and sometimes, water bodies dividing the 
SAR scene into two (as is the case for our test site Cologne). 
Sparse phase unwrapping should be used which only unwraps 
the coherent points.  
4. CONCLUSION 
The results demonstrate the potential of TerraSAR-X High 
Resolution Spotlight data to measure the thermal dilation of 
complex structures such as bridges. Different techniques such 
as PSI, DSI, SPN and SBAS have been discussed for this 
purpose. It is now possible to monitor the thermal stress of 
urban infrastructure for stability analysis. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Bamler and P. Hartl, “Synthetic aperture radar interferometry- 
Topical review,” Inverse problems- 14, R1 - R54, IOP Publishing 
Limited (UK), 1998. 
[2] N. Adam, M. Eineder, N. Yague-Martinez, and R. Bamler, “High 
resolution interferometric stacking with TerraSAR-X,” In: Proc. 
IGARSS, Boston, US, 2008. 
[3] A. Ferretti, C. Prati, and F. Rocca, “Permanent scatterers in SAR 
interferometry,” IEEE TGARS, vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 8-20, 2001.  
[4] K. Goel and N. Adam, “High resolution differential interferometric 
stacking via adaptive spatial phase filtering,” In: Proc. IGARSS, 
Vancouver, Canada, 2011. 
[5] J. Duro, J. Inglada, J. Closa, N. Adam, and A. Arnaud, “High Resolution 
Differential Interferometry using time series of ERS and ENVISAT SAR 
data,” In: Proc. FRINGE, Frascati, Italy, 2003. 
[6] J. Duro, O. Mora, M. Agudo, and A. Arnaud, "First results of Stable 
Point Network software using TerraSAR-X data," In: Proc. EUSAR, 
Aachen, Germany, 2010.  
[7] P. Berardino, G. Fornaro, R. Lanari, and E. Sansosti, “A new algorithm 
for surface deformation monitoring based on small baseline differential 
SAR interferograms,” IEEE TGARS, vol. 40, no. 11, pp. 2375–2383, 
2002. 
B
A
D
C
E
F
I
H
G
J
[mm]
-5
+5
Fig. 1. Estimates of amplitude of seasonal motion (caused by thermal dilation) for Cologne, Germany, via PSI exploiting 
TerraSAR-X data from March, 2009 - December, 2010. Different types of urban structures have been highlighted in white 
(buildings), yellow (bridges) and red (railways). 
956

 
Fig. 2. Estimates of amplitude of seasonal motion (caused by thermal dilation) for ‘Zoobruecke’ bridge in Cologne, Germany, via 
PSI (left image) and DSI (right image), respectively, exploiting TerraSAR-X data from March, 2009 - December, 2010. It can be 
observed that DSI provides a high density of measured points as compared to PSI. 
Fig. 3. Estimates of thermal amplitudes for Hohenzollernbruecke’ (top) and ‘Duetzer Bruecke’ (bottom) bridges in Cologne, 
Germany, via SPN technique exploiting TerraSAR-X data from March, 2009 - December, 2010. Local temperature data was used 
for the processing instead of a cosine modelling.  
 
Fig. 4. Mean deformation estimates for area near ‘Lanxess Arena’ building and ‘Zoobruecke’ bridge in Cologne, Germany, via 
SBAS exploiting TerraSAR-X data from March, 2009 - December, 2010. Non-linear deformation time series is visualized for a 
point on the concert arena building, which includes linear as well as seasonal deformation due to thermal dilation. 
 
957
