Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
0141-0296/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Long-term deformation monitoring of a steel-truss arch bridge using PSI 
technique refined by temperature field analysis 
Yun Zhou a,b, Guanwang Hao b,*, Jianwei Chen b, Junjie Wei b, Jiayuan Zheng b 
a Key Laboratory for Damage Diagnosis of Engineering Structures of Hunan Province, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China 
b College of Civil Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China   
A R T I C L E I N F O  
Keywords: 
Steel-truss arch bridge 
Structural health monitoring 
Persistent scatterer interferometry 
Meteorological shared data 
Temperature field 
Bridge deformation 
A B S T R A C T  
Satellite-based Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) is a radar technique that can identify 
millimeter-level deformation of long-span bridges. However, the technique focuses on the influence of air 
temperature on long-span bridge deformation, neglecting the difference between the structural temperature field 
and the ambient temperatures. This oversight leads to a diminished precision in the estimation of the thermal 
dilation phase of the InSAR technique. To address this limitation, this study presents a long-term deformation 
monitoring methodology for long-span bridges by integrating Persistent Scatterer Interferometry (PSI) with a 
structure’s temperature field. A finite-element (FE) model is constructed for investigating the key structural 
members of a bridge, and, utilizing ambient air temperature sourced from a meteorological data sharing plat­
form, a transient heat transfer analysis is conducted to obtain the time-dependent temperature distribution. The 
temperature field at the moment of SAR imaging is utilized by the PSI technique, instead of the ambient air 
temperature. The proposed method was applied to monitor the deformation of a long-span steel truss arch bridge 
using 163 Sentinel-1A acquisitions and 35 COSMO-SkyMed acquisitions, to obtain the line of sight displacement. 
The displacements derived from different data sources were analyzed and subsequently compared with FE 
calculation results and on-site measurement data. The observed relative error of thermal dilation velocity using 
the PSI technology refined by bridge temperature field (RPSI) spanned from −
4.52 % to 4.50 %, indicating the 
estimations of thermal dilation were well refined. Results demonstrate that RPS succeeds in large-span bridges 
deformations measurement, providing a valuable tool for realizing lightweight monitoring of bridge structures.   
1. Introduction 
Bridge deformation, which reflects the overall stiffness of the bridge 
structure, is crucial for structural performance assessment [1,2]. Bridge 
displacement measurement techniques can be categorized into contact 
and non-contact measurement methods. Contact measurement methods 
such as using displacement meters, inclinometers, connecting tubes, 
global navigation satellite systems, and fully automated total stations, 
are widely used due to their reliability. However, they are limited by the 
local observation and the high costs, especially for continuous moni­
toring tasks. While the non-contact measurement methods, including 
machine vision technique, microwave radar sensing technique, 
photogrammetric technique, and 3D laser scanning technique, have 
notably improved the efficiency of bridge displacement measurement, 
the accuracy of these non-contact methods may be compromised by 
environmental conditions and the distances involved in testing. 
Space-to-Earth observation techniques, represented by the Interfero­
metric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) technique, extracts the target 
deformation through slant range phase interferometry, which can obtain 
large-area surface deformation at all-times and under all weather con­
ditions. The InSAR technique which has been extensively used in 
infrastructure deformation monitoring, including buildings [3], high­
ways [4], railways [5], dams and embankments [6], also presents a 
much more cost-effective solution for deformation monitoring. 
Abbreviations: InSAR,, Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar; CSK,, COSMO-SkyMed; S1A,, Sentinel-1A; PS,, Persistent scatterer; RPSI,, Refined PSI technique; 
PSI,, Persistent Scatterer Interferometry; FE, Finite-element; MAE, Mean absolute error; RMSE, Root mean squared error; MaxAE, Maximum absolute error; S1A-PSI, 
S1A data processed with the PSI technique; CSK-PSI, CSK data processed with the PSI technique; S1A-RPSI, S1A data processed with the RPSI technique; CSK-RPSI, 
CSK data processed with the RPSI technique; TDV, Thermal dilation velocity. 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: gwh0114@hnu.edu.cn (G. Hao).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Engineering Structures 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engstruct 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2024.118164 
Received 14 November 2023; Received in revised form 11 March 2024; Accepted 4 May 2024   

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
2
Relying on the assistance of medium to high-resolution SAR satel­
lites, the accuracy of deformation measurements via InSAR technique 
has been effectively enhanced. However, the practical application of 
InSAR has been restricted by influence factors such as atmospheric de­
lays, temporal decorrelation, and spatial decorrelation. The Persistent 
Scatterer Interferometry (PSI) approach, which focuses on reliable and 
stable points in a series of SAR images, addresses these limitations and is 
applied for small movements monitoring. Huang et al. [7] utilized PSI 
technique to monitor displacements in a high-speed railway bridge, and 
the PSI-measured displacements was compared with in-situ measure­
ments results. Ma et al. [8] conducted a tentative test for measuring the 
sub-millimeter settlement and uplift of a bridge, in which the persistent 
scatterer (PS) and distributed scatterer were jointly detected to increase 
point density. Qin et al. [9] proposed a method to integrate the 
Point-like Targets selection strategies of PS and small baseline interfer­
ometric processing, which effectively boosted the robustness of the 
deformation estimation for cable-stayed bridges. Caspani et al. [10] 
extracted the displacement of a highway bridge using the PSI technique 
and investigated its correlation with environmental phenomena, spe­
cifically variations in air temperature and river water flow. Moreover, 
the structural movement velocity acquired using PSI-derived displace­
ment time series can serve as an indicator for bridge safety assessment. 
Based on both ascending and descending SAR acquisitions, a 
two-dimensional displacement configuration of multi-span bridges with 
properly defined error bounds was determined, demonstrating the 
effectiveness of the InSAR technique in early damage detection [11]. 
Sousa [12] processed 52 S1A images from 1995 to 2001 using the PSI 
technique, successfully tracing back to the historical subsidence infor­
mation of a bridge, revealing that the maximum deformation rate before 
the bridge collapse reached 20 mm/year. A displacement map for the 
structure was generated by Milillo et al. [13] based on the InSAR tech­
nique and Markov Chain Monte Carlo approach, which indicated that 
the bridge was undergoing an increased magnitude of deformations over 
time prior to its collapse. Using the SqueeSAR algorithm, the time series 
of bridge deformations with millimeter-range precision were obtained, 
indicating that no permanent deformations occurred in the 
post-tensioned segments during the 1.3-year monitoring period [14]. 
Displacement data obtained by InSAR was combined with structural and 
collapse analysis by Farneti et al., thereby enabling the recognition of 
potentially critical conditions and the prediction of failure times for 
bridges experiencing slow landslide-induced movements [15]. The 
feasibility of the PSI technique in monitoring the long-term deformation 
of bridges has been effectively validated in previous studies. Thermal 
dilation significantly contributes to the deformation of long-span 
bridges, making it crucial to the precision of PSI measurements [16, 
17]. The InSAR technique was used to detect the millimeter-level motion 
on ground structures and the thermal sensitivity was introduced by 
Cusson et al. [18] to monitor bridge behavior. A linear regression model 
between InSAR longitudinal displacement and ambient air temperature 
was developed by Huang et al. [7] showing that the PSI-measured dis­
placements were in good agreement with the in-situ measurements. 
Lazecky et al. [19] utilized an approach to identify the thermal expan­
sion component, using an additional parameter to search for a rela­
tionship between interferogram phase values and temperature 
differences at the times of image acquisition. Qin. et al. [20,21] intro­
duced the linear thermal dilation estimation into the traditional differ­
ential InSAR method, which significantly improved the thermal dilation 
separation for arch bridges. 
In previous research on the estimation of thermal dilation using the 
PSI technique, which the air temperature was utilized, the difference 
between the bridge’s temperature field and the ambient air temperature 
was generally ignored. The temperature field of a long-span bridge is 
variable and complicated, influenced by periodically time-varying solar 
radiation and continuous structural heat exchange with the surrounding 
environment [22–24]. Based on meteorological data measured by 
on-site installed sensors, computational methodologies for bridge 
temperature fields can be established [25]. Lu et al. [26] studied the 
concrete bridge box girder temperature distribution and thermal effect 
under solar radiation and the thermal load. A two-dimensional FE model 
for a typical section of a box girder of a long-span suspension and 
cable-stayed bridge was constructed, with which the time-dependent 
temperature distribution was determined based on ambient tempera­
ture measurements through transient heat transfer analysis [27–29]. 
Based on long-term temperature monitoring data and statistical anal­
ysis, Xia et al. [30] developed a time-varying solar radiation model that 
incorporates the impact of real-time weather fluctuations, including 
variations 
in 
cloud 
cover. 
A 
vertical 
discrete 
and 
dimensionality-reduced model for rapid temperature loads calculation 
of bridge structures were proposed by Fan et al. [31] The random forest 
model was used to predict the sectional effective temperature, taking 
into consideration the environmental and meteorological factors (tem­
perature, solar radiation, humidity, wind speed, and direction) [32]. Xia 
et al. [33] developed a unified approach of heat-transfer and structural 
analyses to calculate the temperature distribution and the associated 
responses of an entire structure by integrating the field monitoring data. 
A refined 3D model of a three-tower cable-stayed bridge, of which the 
thermal boundary conditions were determined using environmental 
field monitoring data, was constructed to facilitate a comprehensive 
global 3D heat-transfer analysis [34]. Abid et al. and Lu et al. [35,36] 
described the construction and instrumentation of an experimental 
box-girder segment, aiming to analyze the temperature distributions in 
concrete bridges under the fluctuation of air temperature and solar ra­
diation thermal loads. Consequently, to analyze the temperature effects 
on bridges based on the field monitoring data, it is essential to establish 
the on-site monitoring system to collect extensive temperature mea­
surement data. 
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, few studies have emphasized 
the impact of the difference between air temperature and bridge tem­
perature field on the calculation accuracy of thermal dilation of the PSI 
technique. This study therefore focuses on analyzing the temperature 
field of bridge structures by utilizing meteorological shared data, with 
the aim of overcoming the limitations due to insufficient temperature 
measurement data and of refining the PSI technique (RPSI) through the 
bridge temperature field for long-term deformation monitoring. Tran­
sient thermal analysis was conducted based on equivalent air tempera­
ture and equivalent heat transfer coefficient, which were derived from 
meteorological shared data (temperature, wind speed, and precipita­
tion) obtained from a weather station near the case study bridge. This 
analysis determined the temperature distribution of the key structural 
members, thereby providing a time-dependent temperature for esti­
mating the thermal dilation phase of the RPSI technique. Applying this 
novel approach, S1A (medium-low resolution) and CSK (high resolu­
tion) imagery datasets were processed to derive the line of sight (LOS) 
displacement time series for the case study steel-truss arch bridge. By 
integrating the SAR imaging LOS geometry with the structural charac­
teristics of the bridge, the bridge’s longitudinal displacement time series 
was derived. The RPSI-based displacements were then compared with 
PSI-based displacements, FE simulated results and field monitoring data, 
to verify the reliability and accuracy of the proposed approach. The 
outcomes of this study can offer technical support for achieving light­
weight monitoring of the long-term deformation of long-span bridges, 
thereby facilitating sensor-free and cost-effective structural health 
assessments. 
2. Methodology 
2.1. RPSI technique 
Lightweight monitoring involves the use of minimal equipment, 
materials, and labor for structural health monitoring, highlighting its 
status as an optimal solution that balances precision with economic 
viability. The PSI technique is a feasible lightweight monitoring method 
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
3
owing to its cost-efficiency and accuracy in measurement. PSI technique 
examines SAR time-series, concentrating on steady, point-like scatterers 
that exhibit no speckle and generate a definitive signal response [37,38]. 
Assuming N SAR images covering the observation area over a certain 
period are available, one image is selected as the master image consid­
ering temporal baseline, spatial baseline, and Doppler centroid fre­
quency, with the remaining images serving as slave images. The N-1 
slave images are co-registered and resampled to the spatial domain of 
the master image, resulting in N-1 interferometric pairs. Utilizing digital 
elevation models, differential interferometric processing is applied to 
these interferometric pairs, yielding differential phases for each PS point 
as shown in the following equation: 
ψ = φref + φtop + φdef + φatm + φnoi
(1)  
where the interferometric phase in SAR images is affected by various 
error sources, which can be categorized into five components: φref rep­
resents the orbit estimation errors, φtop is the height errors, φdef means 
the terrain displacement in LOS path, φatm indicates the atmospheric 
phase delay, and φnoi represents the thermal noise and other error 
components. After differential processing the phase contains the linear 
deformation phase, elevation phase, and residual phase, as follows: 
ψ = 4π
λ t⋅v +
4π
λR sin θ B⋅ε + φres
(2)  
where λ represents the radar wavelength; R is the slant range from the 
radar to the ground target; θ denotes the radar incidence angle; B stands 
for the vertical baseline; ε is the elevation error caused by the vertical 
structural displacement of the bridge; t refers to the temporal baseline; v 
is the linear deformation rate along the LOS direction, and φres signifies 
the residual phase, which includes atmospheric contributions, non- 
linear deformation phase, and noise. 
The temperature is a primary factor influencing the long-term 
deformation of long-span bridges. Hence, thermal dilation parameters 
are introduced to the nonlinear deformation of the interferometric 
model by the RPSI technique, as expressed by the following equation: 
ψ = 4π
λ t⋅v +
4π
λR sin θ B⋅ε + 4π
λ Ttf⋅k + φres
(3)  
where Ttf denotes the temperature field of the bridge structure corre­
sponding to the PS points at each image acquisition, and k is the thermal 
expansion coefficient. 
To accurately estimate the parameters of the interference phase 
model, this study conducted a quadratic difference interference analysis 
on the connections between PS points within the Delaunay triangulation 
network formed by PS points. The expression for the quadratic differ­
ence interference model is as follows: 
Δψ = 4π
λ tΔv +
4π
λR sin θ BΔε + 4π
λ TtfΔk + Δφres
(4)  
where Δψ is the differential interferometric wrapped phase, Δv denotes 
the unknown differential velocity, Δε stands for the differential elevation 
error, Δk represents the differential thermal expansion parameter, and 
Δφres refers to the residual phase component. 
The estimation of parameters Δv, Δε, and Δk is aimed at searching for 
the optimal solution of the objective function, meaning finding the 
parameter estimates that correspond to the maximum coherence coef­
ficient of γ. This function is depicted as follows: 
γ = 1
N
∑
N
i=1
exp
(
jΔψi
obs −Δψi
m
(
Δv, Δε, Δk
))
(5)  
where Δψi
obs represents the observed phase difference, Δψi
m denotes the 
model’s calculated value, and N signifies the number of interference 
pairs. 
The thermal dilation phase after differential processing can be 
expressed as follows: 
Δψi
T = 4π
λ ΔTtf
ik
(6)  
where ΔTtf
i is the difference of the bridge temperature between the two 
acquisitions. 
The RPSI technique involves four steps: images co-registration, PS 
points identification, atmospheric phase screen (APS) estimation and 
removal, and deformation recovery. The workflow of this technique is 
depicted in Fig. 1 and involves the following steps: 
(1) Images co-registration. The master image is chosen from N SAR 
images based on the principle of minimal temporal and spatial baselines. 
The coherence coefficient method is employed to register all slave im­
ages with the master image. 
Fig. 1. RPSI processing flow.  
Fig. 2. SAR observation geometry of the target point.  
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
4
(2) PS points identification. Using precise orbital vectors and inter­
ferometric geometric relationships, the reference phase is removed. The 
topographic phase is eliminated with digital elevation models, produc­
ing a differential interferometric series map. The amplitude time series is 
calculated for each pixel within the image, and the PS points are selected 
based on the amplitude residual information. 
(3) APS estimation and removal. The bridge temperature field is 
utilized to estimate the thermal dilation component of RPSI technique at 
this stage. The height errors are estimated using the geometric infor­
mation of the structure. Based on the spatial low-frequency and tem­
poral high-frequency characteristics of the atmospheric phase, the 
filtering is applied to obtain the nonlinear deformation. 
(4) Deformation recovery. The geometric transformation relation­
ship between the radar coordinate system and the geospatial coordinate 
system is used to obtain the displacement time series of the PS points at 
the geospatial location of the bridge. 
The LOS displacement of the bridge is the sum of the projections of its 
three-dimensional displacement components onto the LOS direction.  
Fig. 2 illustrates the SAR side-looking imaging geometry, using 
descending datasets as an example. The relationship between the LOS 
deformation and the three-dimensional deformation components is 
presented as follows: 
DLOS = Dv⋅cos θ + Dn⋅sin θ⋅sin α −De⋅sin θ⋅cos α
(7)  
where Dv, Dn, De are the displacements in vertical, north-south, and 
west-east directions respectively. θ is the side-looking angle, α is the 
azimuth angle, and β is the angle between the bridge and the north- 
south direction. Considering the deformation orientation of the target 
point and the spatial geometric imaging relationship of SAR, this rela­
tionship can be expressed as follows: 
DLOS = Dv⋅cos θ −Dn⋅sin θ⋅sin(α + β) −De⋅sin θ⋅cos(α + β)
(8) 
Assuming the vertical and transverse displacements are disregarded, 
the relationship between the longitudinal displacement Dx and the LOS 
displacement can be represented as follows: 
Dx = DLOS/ sin θ⋅sin(α + β)
(9)  
2.2. Structural temperature field determination 
To enhance the calculations accuracy of thermal dilation of the PSI 
technique, the temperature field of the key structural members at the 
SAR image acquisition time was used instead of the air temperature. The 
bridge structural members constantly exchange heat with the environ­
ment through thermal convection and radiation. The meteorological 
parameters required for calculating the temperature field include air 
temperature, wind speed, and absorbed radiation. The air temperature 
and wind speed were obtained from the web of WeatherSpark (http://zh 
. Weatherspark.com). Given the time, location, material properties of 
the structure, and the normal angles of each surface of the key members, 
the absorbed radiation can be determined by the Kehlbeck model as 
follows [39]: 
I = In + Iw + Ir + Id + Ie
(10)  
In = Isc0.9(tuka/ sin β)
(11)  
Iw = 0.5Isc sin β 1 −(0.9tuka)(sin β)−1
1 −1.4 ln(0.9tuka)
(12)  
Ir = 0.5re(In + Iw)(1 −
cos θ)
(13)  
Id = EaCs(Tk + Ta)40.5(1 −
cos θ)
(14)  
Ie = (Eu/Ea −Eu + 1)Id
(15)  
whereIn, Iw, Ir, Idand Ie represent the direct solar radiation, diffuse ra­
diation, ground surface radiation, atmospheric radiation from the sky, 
and the environmental radiation, respectively; Isc is the solar constant; tu 
denotes the turbidity coefficient; ka is the atmospheric pressure; β rep­
resents the solar altitude angle; re is the ground radiation coefficient; θ is 
the angle between the desired surface and the horizontal plane; Ea and 
Eu are the atmospheric radiation coefficients and environmental radia­
tion coefficients, respectively; Cs represents the blackbody radiation 
coefficient; Tk is used to convert between Celsius and absolute temper­
ature; Ta is the ambient temperature at bridge location obtained from 
the weather station data Tai using spatial interpolation method. The 
Fig. 3. Thermal environments of a bridge.  
Fig. 4. Bridge temperature field calculation method based on shared meteo­
rological data. 
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
5
thermal environment is depicted in Fig. 3. 
In this study, the Kehlbeck formula was adopted to calculate the 
convection heat transfer coefficient hc, while the irradiation heat 
transfer coefficient hr was computed using the following empirical for­
mula proposed by Fernando A. Branco [40]: 
hc = 5.8 + 4v
(16)  
hr = ε[4.8 + 0.075(Ta −5)]
(17)  
where v is the wind speed obtained from the weather station data vi 
using spatial interpolation method and ε denotes the emissivity of the 
structural material. 
The heat flux on the boundary is proportional to the difference be­
tween the air temperature and the bridge-surface temperature [27]. The 
boundary conditions for the thermal analysis of a bridge can be written 
as follows: 
λ ∂T
∂n⃒⃒⃒⃒s
= h(Ta −Ts)
(18)  
where n represents normal to the boundary surface s; h is referred to as 
equivalent heat transfer coefficient; Ta denotes the air temperature; Ts 
denotes the structural surface temperature. 
h = hc + hr
(19)  
when considering both radiation and convection loads on the structural 
members, the radiative heat flux density needs to be equivalently con­
verted to convective heat flux density. The equivalent air temperature at 
the boundary surface can be expressed as follows: 
T = Ta + αI/h
(20)  
where α (0 < α < 1) represents the absorptivity coefficient of the surface 
material. 
For bridges without adequate temperature sensors installations, on- 
site measurements could not provide a comprehensive initial tempera­
ture of the key structural members. In this study, an initial uniform 
temperature field was assumed and the equivalent air temperature at 
sunrise was calculated. The heat transfer boundary conditions were 
applied to the members. The temperature distribution becomes 
nonuniform, serving as the initial condition for more detailed thermal 
analysis. 
As depicted in Fig. 4, the equivalent heat transfer boundary 
conditions, including the equivalent air temperature and the heat 
transfer coefficient, were employed as convection loads. By conducting a 
transient thermal analysis, the temperature field of the key structural 
members was obtained. 
2.3. Meteorological data calculation 
Based on meteorological data from weather stations, calculations for 
the bridge location were performed using the inverse square distance 
gradient method [41] for air temperature and the Kriging method [42] 
for wind speed. The performance of interpolation methods was evalu­
ated, leading to a strategy for computing meteorological data at varying 
straight-line distances between the bridge and the weather stations. Six 
representative regions were evaluated - Tibet Autonomous Region, 
Jiangsu Province, Chongqing Municipality, Sichuan Province, Hainan 
Province, and Heilongjiang Province - considering factors such as 
longitude, latitude, altitude, weather stations density, and topography. 
The topographical maps are shown in Fig. 5. 
Based on the hourly air temperature observed by ground meteoro­
logical stations in various regions from February 15 to February 25, 
2023, the distance d between the target meteorological station and the 
nearest station was used as the classification criterion. A total of 401 
ground meteorological stations distributed in these regions were divided 
into six groups. Taking a meteorological station as the target location, 
the spatial interpolation methods were performed using temperature or 
wind speed data from the five nearest meteorological stations. The 
interpolated results at the target location for temperature are shown in  
Fig. 5. Topographical maps of different regions (Unit: m). (a) Tibet Autonomous Region; (b) Jiangsu Province; (c) Chongqing Municipality; (d) Sichuan Province; (e) 
Hainan Province; (f) Heilongjiang Province. 
Table 1 
Spatial interpolation errors for air temperature.  
Group 
dmin (km) 
d (km) 
MAEint 
MAEnea 
RMSEint 
RMSEnea 
A 
0-15  
36.5  
0.63  
0.61  
0.94  
0.94 
B 
15-20  
26.5  
0.44  
0.38  
0.60  
0.54 
C 
20-25  
40.5  
0.66  
0.95  
0.90  
1.20 
D 
25-30  
56.9  
1.06  
1.61  
1.39  
2.03 
E 
30-35  
44.6  
0.73  
1.05  
1.02  
1.46 
Note: MAE = ∑n
i=1|Ni −
Mi|/n, RMSE =̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑n
i=1(Ni −Mi)2/n
√
, Ni represents the 
actual value; Mi stands for the interpolated value; n is the total number of 
samples. MAEint and RMSEint denote the indictors derived from interpolated 
results, while MAEnea and RMSEnea are those from the nearest weather station.  
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
6
Table 1, and for wind speed in Table 2. The mean absolute error (MAE) 
and root mean squared error (RMSE) are used to assess the accuracy of 
the spatial interpolation methods. The interpolated errors for air tem­
perature and wind speed are influenced by the spatial distribution of the 
weather stations. Particularly, the distance from the target location to 
the nearest station dmin and the average distance to the stations d.uti­
lized for interpolation play a significant role. It can be found that if 
dminwas less than 20 km, the MAE derived from using temperature or 
wind speed values from the closest meteorological station is lower than 
that obtained from interpolated predictions using surrounding stations. 
Consequently, if dmin is under 20 km, it’s advisable to directly use the air 
temperature or the wind speed from that nearest station for the target 
location. 
3. Deflection of case study bridge 
3.1. Details of case study bridge 
A six-lane high-speed railway bridge was used as a case study, which 
consists of two continuous steel-truss arches and four approach spans, 
with a span configuration of 108 + 192 + 336 + 336 + 192 + 108 m. 
The overall layout of the bridge is shown in Fig. 6. Spherical steel 
bearings are used as supports, with the #7 being a fixed support, and the 
other supports allowing longitudinal motion as movable bearings. Since 
the bridge piers has deep pile foundations, vertical settlement is virtu­
ally negligible [43,44] and as the lateral displacement was found to be 
less than 1 % of the longitudinal displacement it was ignored in the 
subsequent analysis [45]. Hence, the displacements caused by the 
temperature were observed at the bridge’s piers along the longitudinal 
direction. 
3.2. SAR datasets 
A total of 163 scenes of S1A interferometric wide swath imagery with 
a resolution of 5 m × 20 m (ascending orbit) from January 2017 to 
December 2021 were used, and 35 scenes of CSK spotlight imagery with 
a resolution of 1.2 m × 1.9 m (descending orbit) from September 2016 
to September 2019 were also utilized. The temporal and spatial base­
lines of the images are illustrated in Fig. 7. For the S1A satellite, the 
incidence angle, denoted as θ1, is 33.91◦, and its corresponding heading 
angle, represented as α1, is 349.26◦. Similarly, the CSK satellite has a 
33.94◦incidence angle, designated as θ2, and its associated heading 
angle, denoted as α2, is 190.55◦. The bridge’s longitudinal axis is ori­
ented at a 45◦angle to true north. The selected S1A and CSK image 
capture times were 10:03 and 09:53 respectively. The bridge is in the 
UTC+ 8 time zone and the SAR image time is around 18:00. 
3.3. Meteorological data 
To compute meteorological parameters, the study utilized hourly 
temperature and wind speed data obtained from an airport weather 
station near the case study bridge, which were accessed through the 
WeatherSpark platform. Since the case study bridge was located 16 ki­
lometers in a straight line from the airport, the ambient temperature at 
the airport can be assumed to be representative of that at the bridge 
location. The meteorological parameters of ambient temperature and 
average wind speed were recorded at the airport weather station from 
Table 2 
Spatial interpolation errors for wind speed.  
Group 
dmin (km) 
d (km) 
MAEint 
MAEnea 
RMSEint 
RMSEnea 
A 
0-15  
36.5  
0.90  
0.94  
1.13  
1.19 
B 
15-20  
26.5  
0.65  
0.65  
0.81  
0.86 
C 
20-25  
40.5  
0.82  
1.00  
1.05  
1.26 
D 
25-30  
56.9  
0.80  
1.00  
1.03  
1.28 
E 
30-35  
44.6  
0.72  
0.86  
0.92  
1.10  
Fig. 6. Layout of the case study bridge (Unit: m).  
Fig. 7. Perpendicular baseline vs temporal baseline plot. (a) S1A; (b) CSK.  
Fig. 8. Ambient temperature.  
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
7
March 5th to 16th, 2015 (as depicted in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9), and used for 
calculating the structural temperature field. Additionally, fiber Bragg 
grating temperature sensors were installed as illustrated in Fig. 10 [46]. 
3.4. Solar radiation and deck shading 
Fluctuations in the surface azimuth angle, solar altitude angle, and 
projection angle induce alterations in the illuminated and shaded re­
gions on a structure’s surface [47]. Taking January 1, 2020, as an 
example, sunrise is at 7:04 am, and sunset is at 5:11 pm. By analyzing 
the positional relationship between the solar trajectory and the bridge 
deck, the bearings of side truss were exposed to sunlight from 7:04 am to 
11:27 am. Afterward, they remained in the shaded area until 5:11 pm, as 
illustrated in Fig. 11(a). The bearing of mid-truss was covered by the 
bridge deck and truss members in the whole daytime, as depicted in 
Fig. 11(b). Hence, the solar radiation was utilized to address the 
Fig. 9. Wind speed.  
Fig. 10. Location of temperature sensors (unit: mm).  
Fig. 11. Description of solar motion and deck shading. (a) bearing of side main truss; (b) bearing of middle main truss.  
Fig. 12. FE model of key members. (a) section A-A; (b) section B-B; (c) section C-C; (d) section D-D.  
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
8
influence of shadow on the structure’s surface caused by the sun’s 
motion. 
4. Application of the PSI technique refined by temperature field 
4.1. Thermal analysis of the box-shaped cross section and Convergence 
analysis 
The temperature distribution in the bridge’s longitudinal direction is 
assumed to remain uniform [48]. The two-dimensional FE models of the 
truss members’ cross-sections were constructed using the PLANE55 
element in ANSYS 2021 R1, which possesses four temperature degrees of 
freedom at its nodes. The steel material is Q345qD, with a thermal 
conductivity of 60.5 W/(m⋅℃) and a heat capacity of 434 J/(kg⋅℃). See  
Fig. 12. 
The chosen mesh must ensure solution convergence for the heat 
diffusion problem. And the section A-A FE model in Fig. 12 was selected 
to analyze the convergence. The solution’s behavior as a function of the 
number of finite elements is valuable for determining the threshold 
mesh density for convergence. Fig. 13 illustrates the mesh configura­
tions with varying numbers FEs. For the thermal problem, considering 
the two-dimensional FE model’s average temperature at 8:00 pm on 
March 9, 2015, as a representative solution parameter is essential. The 
solutions show monotonic convergence with an increase in the number 
of FEs, reaching a point beyond which additional increases in mesh 
density no longer influence the result. By adopting around 0.6 × 104 
FEs, solution convergence for both issues are secured [49,50]. 
The material properties for thermal analysis and the equivalent heat 
transfer boundary conditions were input into the established FE model. 
The time-dependent temperature curves were then obtained as shown in  
Fig. 14. The comparison between the measured and calculated values 
indicates a consistent trend with an average error ranging from 
−2.56 % to 2.50 %. This discrepancy arises from two primary sources. 
Firstly, the temporal variability of wind speed, influenced by factors 
such as environmental obstructions, local temperature differences, and 
the geographical landscape, contributes to the error in temperature 
calculations. Secondly, the precision of solar radiation intensity calcu­
lations, significantly affected by climatic conditions like cloud cover and 
humidity, also plays a crucial role in the observed temperature 
deviations. 
4.2. Bridge FE model analysis 
A three-dimensional FE model of the case study bridge is established 
to analyze the bridge deflection under various temperatures. As shown 
in Fig. 15, the bridge FE model consists of 59,918 nodes and 112,706 
elements. The trusses, hangers, and stiffeners are established by a 
BEAM188 element, and the steel decks and the diaphragms of the box 
girder are established by a SHELL181 element. The boundary conditions 
Fig. 13. Temperature variation with the number of finite elements.  
Fig. 14. Temperature time history curves. (a) WA-S; (b) WB-N; (c)WC-N; (d) WD-N.  
Fig. 15. Bridge FE model.  
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
9
of the FE model are set as follows: the boundary conditions of the 7# 
piers are restrained with all translational degrees of freedom including 
longitudinal X, transverse Y, and vertical Z, and the boundary conditions 
at remaining piers are restrained in the Z-direction and Y-direction. 
Moreover, the thermal expansion coefficients of the FE model were set as 
1.2 × 10−5/℃. Based on the heat transfer boundary conditions, the 
materials’ thermal conductivity and heat capacity, the temperature 
fields of the truss members were determined through the principles of 
heat transfer theory. The time-dependent temperatures of these mem­
bers were treated as loads and applied to the bridge FE model. The 
temperature-induced deformation was then obtained by transient ther­
mal analysis. 
4.3. RPSI-derived displacement time series 
The temperature field of the structural members were obtained 
through transient thermal analysis as mentioned in Section 4.1. Conse­
quently, the temperature of the bridge’s PS points at the SAR image 
acquisition time can be employed in Eq. (3) and Eq. (6) for differential 
interferometric processing. Leveraging the time-dependent temperature 
distributions has enhanced the calculation accuracy of the thermal 
dilation phase, thereby improving the measurement precision of RPSI- 
based LOS deformation. The LOS deformation velocity of the bridge’s 
PS points is shown in Fig. 16. The spatial distribution of PS points, based 
on both CSK and S1A data, aligns well with the bridge’s geometric 
shape. The deformation velocity displays evident symmetry with respect 
to the #7 support. The deformation time series at each pier and the air 
temperature at the image acquisition time are presented in Fig. 17. 
There is a strong correlation between the LOS deformation and air 
temperature, indicting distinct periodic characteristics. The deformation 
time series at piers #4 to #6 show a positive correlation with air tem­
perature, while piers #8 to #10 exhibit the opposite correlation. Addi­
tionally, the deformation at six piers displays symmetric characteristics 
relative to the central symmetry of pier #7. 
4.4. Comparison of the InSAR-measured and simulated displacement 
The time-dependent temperature of the key members cross-section 
was applied to the nodes of the FE model (bottom surface of the deck 
slab, longitudinal and transverse beams, top chord, web members, and 
bottom chord) to obtain the bridge deformation under various temper­
atures. Based on the LOS deformation discussed in Section 4.2, the 
longitudinal displacement at six piers was derived using Eq. (9). This 
displacement was then compared with the simulated results, as depicted 
Fig. 16. Spatial distribution and LOS deformation of PS points (mm/year). (a) S1A, (b) CSK.  
Fig. 17. LOS deformation at six piers and image acquisition temperatures. (a) S1A; (b) CSK.  
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
10
in Fig. 18. It is noticeable that both PSI and RPSI measured results are in 
good agreement with the simulated results, with RPSI technique 
demonstrating higher accuracy. The errors in longitudinal displacement 
measurement, derived from the processing of the CSK and S1A data 
using both PSI and RPSI techniques, are listed in Table 3. Compared to 
the numerical results, the MAE of the RPSI-derived displacement mea­
surements is consistently lower than that of PSI technique. Similarly, 
RMSE associated with the RPSI method is also less than that of the PSI 
technique, which is particularly evident when considering the maximum 
absolute error (MaxAE). For both S1A and CSK datasets, the error for PSI 
technique ranges from 4.73 mm to 24.57 mm, whereas for RPSI tech­
nique, it lies between 2.67 mm and 14.48 mm. This investigation 
demonstrates that by utilizing shared meteorological data and employ­
ing thermal analysis methods to determine the structural temperature at 
the location of bridge’s PS points during SAR imaging, the calculation 
precision of the thermal expansion phase can be effectively refined, 
leading to enhanced deformation measurement accuracy of the PSI 
technique. In addition, despite the relatively lower spatial resolution of 
S1A imagery compared to CSK imagery, the calculated results reveal a 
comparable level of displacement measurement accuracy for both 
datasets. Considering that S1A imagery can be freely accessed from 
platforms such as National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA), United States Geological Survey (USGS), and European Space 
Agency (ESA), it presents an economically and reasonably accurate 
method for long-term bridge deformation monitoring using the RPSI 
technique. The results of this study confirm that the RPSI technique 
stands as a viable and effective approach for lightweight bridge moni­
toring, meeting engineering accuracy requirements. 
4.5. Comparison of InSAR and field measurement 
To further validate the accuracy of deformation measured using RPSI 
technique, the long-term correlation was analyzed between longitudinal 
displacement at the piers and ambient temperature. Moreover, the 
deformation calculation accuracy of the RPSI technique and the con­
ventional PSI technique was compared. Using both the PSI and RPSI 
techniques to process the SIA and CSK data, the longitudinal displace­
ment of the case study bridge piers has been determined. This 
displacement exhibits a high linear correlation with the ambient tem­
perature, as illustrated in Fig. 19. This figure presents four scenarios: 
S1A data processed with the PSI technique (S1A-PSI), CSK data 
Fig. 18. InSAR-measured and simulated longitudinal displacement. (a) #4, CSK; (b) #5, CSK; (c) #6, CSK; (d) #4, S1A; (e) #5, S1A; (f) #6, S1A.  
Table 3 
Comparison of longitudinal displacement calculation error (mm).  
Piers 
S1A 
CSK 
#4 
#5 
#6 
#4 
#5 
#6 
MAEPSI  
1.43  
1.66  
4.11  
3.07  
2.38  
1.75 
MAERPSI  
1.16  
1.12  
1.74  
1.59  
1.24  
1.06 
RMSEPSI  
1.84  
1.92  
4.45  
3.91  
3.15  
1.94 
RMSERPSI  
1.69  
1.86  
2.18  
1.93  
1.56  
1.08 
MaxAEPSI  
5.58  
24.57  
19.65  
9.49  
7.58  
4.73 
MaxAERPSI  
6.09  
14.48  
9.67  
4.15  
3.54  
2.67 
Note:MAE = 1
n
∑n
i=1|yi −̂
yi|, RMSE =̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1
n
∑n
i=1(yi −̂ yi)2
√
, and MaxAE =
max
i
|yi −̂
yi|, where yi represents the numerical results. ̂yi denotes the InSAR- 
based results, and n is the total number of SAR acquisition.  
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
11
processed with the PSI technique (CSK-PSI), S1A data processed with the 
RPSI technique (S1A-RPSI), and CSK data processed with the RPSI 
technique (CSK-RPSI). It is clear that the thermal dilation velocity (TDV) 
(displacement caused by unit air temperature change), as represented by 
the slope of the temperature-fitted curve for longitudinal displacement, 
is smaller at the support near pier #7 and larger for those located farther 
from pier #7. The TDV obtained from RPSI and PSI technique is sum­
marized in Table 4. For the PSI technique, the errors in calculating 
longitudinal displacement range from −12.90 % to 3.28 % with S1A 
data and −10.69 to −8.59 % with CSK data. For the RPSI technique, 
the associated errors span from −4.07 % to 3.85 % using S1A data and 
−
4.52 % to 4.50 % using CSK data. The computational results demon­
strate that RPSI exhibits enhanced accuracy in displacement measure­
ment, attributed to the thermal dilation phase refined by the 
temperature field of the structural members. It’s worth noting that the 
spatial distributed discrepancy between the on-site installed sensors and 
the PS points could be a significant source of errors in the displacement 
measurements. 
This study revealed that the thermal dilation phase primarily affects 
the accuracy of PSI technique in the measurement of bridge deforma­
tion. Given that the focus of this investigation is on a steel-truss arch 
bridge, it is generally understood that the rates of heat convection and 
radiation surpass those in concrete box girder bridges. Consequently, in 
the case of concrete steel box girder bridges, the discrepancy between 
the bridge’s temperature field and the ambient temperature becomes 
more pronounced thereby renders the use of RPSI technology particu­
larly advantageous for deformation monitoring. Currently, research 
focused on improving the accuracy of PSI technique remains scarce. The 
proposed RPSI method serves as an effective tool for assessing bridge 
deformation, acknowledging the variations between air temperature 
and the bridge’s temperature field. The findings from this study serve as 
a valuable reference for lightweight monitoring of long-span bridges 
through InSAR technology. 
5. Conclusions 
This study focused on utilizing the InSAR technique for displacement 
measurements of a steel-truss arch bridge. By utilizing the meteorolog­
ical sharing data and heat-transfer analysis method, the time-dependent 
temperature of the bridge members was obtained. The members’ tem­
perature was instrumental in refining the thermal dilation phase 
calculation, thereby enhancing the accuracy of bridge deformation 
monitoring using the RPSI technique. The main conclusions are as 
follows.  
(1) The temperature field was obtained without field monitoring 
data by using meteorological sharing data. The heat transfer 
boundary conditions of the structure were determined using 
Fig. 19. Linear regression model of the longitudinal displacements with respect to the ambient temperatures. (a) S1A-PSI; (b) CSK-PSI; (c) S1A-RPSI; (d) CSK-RPSI.  
Table 4 
Comparison of thermal dilation velocity (mm/℃).  
Piers 
#4 
#5 
#6 
#8 
#9 
#10 
Field data 
7.23 
6.05 
4.21 
4.42 
6.12 
6.96 
S1A-PSI 
7.12 
6.14 
3.74 
3.85 
5.80 
6.82 
CSK-PSI 
6.99 
5.72 
3.76 
4.34 
6.58 
7.56 
S1A-RPSI 
7.47 
5.68 
4.37 
4.24 
5.92 
7.23 
CSK-RPSI 
7.56 
5.82 
4.40 
4.22 
6.01 
7.19 
ES1A-PSI 
-2.01 % 
3.28 % 
-11.16 % 
-12.90 % 
-5.26 % 
-2.04 % 
ECSK-PSI 
-1.83 % 
-3.78 % 
-10.69 % 
-1.81 % 
7.48 % 
8.62 % 
ES1A-RPSI 
2.81 % 
-4.46 % 
3.80 % 
-4.07 % 
-3.30 % 
3.85 % 
ECSK-RPSI 
4.05 % 
-2.10 % 
4.51 % 
-4.52 % 
-1.83 % 
3.30 % 
Note: The term “Field data” refers to TDV derived from on-site displacement 
measurements as reported in literature [40]. The equation for relative error of 
the TDV calculation is given by E = (dI – dF)/dF, where dF indicates the TDV 
from field data and dI denotes the TDV calculated using an InSAR-based method, 
i.e., PSI or RPSI technique. 
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
12
meteorological parameters such as the bridge’s geographical 
coordinates, material emissivity, air temperature, and wind 
speed. With the boundary conditions, thermal conductivity and 
heat capacity of the members’ material, the temperature-time 
curves were derived from transient thermal analysis. 
(2) The accuracy of deformation monitoring using the RPSI tech­
nique can be effectively refined by the bridge temperature field. 
Thermal dilation is a critical component of the RPSI-based bridge 
deformation. The computational accuracy was improved by 
adopting time-dependent temperature instead of ambient air 
temperatures, thereby enhancing the precision of measurements 
obtained with the RPSI technique.  
(3) The RPSI technique was employed to analyze the S1A and CSK 
data to depict the bridge’s spatiotemporal deformation. Tempo­
rally, a strong correlation emerged between LOS displacement 
and air temperature. Spatially, the maximum longitudinal 
displacement caused by a unit temperature change was observed 
at piers #4 and #10.  
(4) Compared to numerical results, the MAE and RMSE values from 
the RPSI technique were both lower than those from the PSI 
technique, confirming the enhanced accuracy of RPSI in defor­
mation monitoring. Moreover, despite the relatively lower spatial 
resolution of S1A imagery, the derived measurements demon­
strate that the displacement detection accuracy of S1A is com­
parable to CSK datasets.  
(5) The TDV derived from both the RPSI and PSI techniques was 
compared to field measurements. For S1A and CSK data, the TDV 
relative error ranged from −12.9 % to 8.59 % using the PSI 
technique, while the TDV relative error using the RPSI technique 
ranged from −4.52 % to 4.50 %, validating the superior perfor­
mance of the RPSI technique over the PSI technique. 
The accuracy of deformation measurement using conventional PS- 
InSAR technology is well refined with a structural temperature field. 
Consequently, the proposed RPSI technique provides a powerful tool for 
achieving lightweight and non-contact structural health monitoring in 
future. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Jiayuan Zheng: Visualization, Validation, Methodology. Junjie 
Wei: Validation, Methodology, Investigation. JianWei Chen: Valida­
tion, Investigation, Data curation. Guanwang Hao: Writing – original 
draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Project administration, 
Methodology, Conceptualization. Yun Zhou: Writing – review & edit­
ing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Funding acquisi­
tion, Conceptualization. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors sincerely appreciate the funding support provided by the 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No.52278306), 
the Key Research and Development Program of Hunan Province (No. 
2022SK2096), the Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of 
China (No. 2023JJ70003), and the Science and Technology Progress and 
Innovation Project of Department of Transportation of Hunan Province 
(No.201912). We are grateful to Jiping Li and Mao Zhu for providing 
CSK satellite imagery and sharing their experience in InSAR data 
processing. The Sentinel-1A data were downloaded from the Alaska 
Satellite Facility Data Search. 
References 
[1] Bonopera M, Chang KC, Chen CC, Lee ZK, Sun YC, Tullini N. Fiber Bragg 
grating–differential settlement measurement system for bridge displacement 
monitoring: case study. J Bridge Eng 2019;24(10):1–12. 
[2] Zhang LX, Liu P, Yan X, Zhao XF. Middle displacement monitoring of 
medium–small span bridges based on laser technology. Struct Control Health Monit 
2020;27(4):e2509. 
[3] Infante D, Di M, Diego, Confuorto P, Tessitore S, T`omas R, et al. Assessment of 
building behavior in slow-moving landslide-affected areas through DInSAR data 
and structural analysis. Eng Struct 2019;199:109638. 
[4] Perissin D, Wang Z, Lin H. Shanghai subway tunnels and highways monitoring 
through Cosmo-SkyMed Persistent Scatterers. ISPRS J Photo Remote Sens 2012;73: 
58–67. 
[5] Macchiarulo V, Milillo P, Blenkinsopp C, Giardina G. Monitoring deformations of 
infrastructure networks: a fully automated GIS integration and analysis of InSAR 
time-series. Struct Health Monit 2022;21(4):1849–78. 
[6] Emadali L, Motagh M, Haghshenas MH. Characterizing post-construction 
settlement of the Masjed-Soleyman embankment dam, Southwest Iran, using 
TerraSAR-X SpotLight radar imagery. Eng Struct 2017;143:261–73. 
[7] Huang QH, Crosetto M, Monserrat O, Crippa B. Displacement monitoring and 
modelling of a high-speed railway bridge using C-band Sentinel-1 data. Isprs J 
Photogramm Remote Sens 2017;128(1)):204–11. 
[8] Ma PF, Li T, Fang CY, Lin H. A tentative test for measuring the sub-millimeter 
settlement and uplift of a high-speed railway bridge using COSMO-SkyMed images. 
ISPRS J Photo Remote Sens 2019;155:1–12. 
[9] Qin XQ, Ding XL, Liao MS. Capturing the deformation characteristics of cable- 
stayed bridges with multi-temporal SAR interferometry. In: Proceedings of the fifth 
international workshop on earth observation and remote sensing applications 
(EORSA). Xian, CHN,; 2018. 
[10] Caspani VF, Tonelli D, Rocca A, Torboli R, Vitti A, Zonta D. Satellite InSAR 
technology for structural health monitoring of road bridges and the surrounding 
territory: a case study. In: Proceedings of the conference on sensors and smart 
structures technologies for civil, mechanical, and aerospace systems. CA, USA 
2023. 
[11] Farneti E, Cavalagli N, Costantini M, Trillo F, Minati F, Venanzi I, et al. Remote 
sensing satellite data and progressive collapse analysis for structural monitoring of 
multi-span bridges. In: Proceedings of the tenth European workshop on structural 
health monitoring (EWSHM). Palermo; 2022. 
[12] Sousa JJ, Bastos L. Multi-temporal SAR interferometry reveals acceleration of 
bridge sinking before collapse. Nat Hazard Earth Syst 2013;13(3):659–67. 
[13] Milillo P, Giardina G, Perissin D, Milillo G, Coletta A, Terranova C. Pre-collapse 
space geodetic observations of critical infrastructure: the Morandi Bridge, Genoa, 
Italy. Remote Sens 2019;11(12):1403. 
[14] Hoppe EJ, Novali F, Rucci A, Fumagalli A, Del Conte S, Falorni G, et al. 
Deformation monitoring of posttensioned bridges using high-resolution satellite 
remote sensing. J Bridge Eng 2019;24(12):04019115. 
[15] Farneti E, Cavalagli N, Venanzi I, Salvatore W, Ubertini F. Residual service life 
prediction for bridges undergoing slow landslide-induced movements combining 
satellite radar interferometry and numerical collapse simulation. Eng Struct 2023; 
293:116628. 
[16] Fornaro G, Reale D, Verde S. Bridge thermal dilation monitoring with millimeter 
sensitivity via multidimensional SAR imaging. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens 2013;10 
(4):677–81. 
[17] Jung J, Kim DJ, Vadivel P, Yun SH. Long-term deflection monitoring for bridges 
using X and C-band time-series SAR interferometry. Remote Sens 2019;11(11): 
1258. 
[18] Cusson D, Rossi C, Ozkan IF. Early warning system for the detection of unexpected 
bridge displacements from radar satellite data. J Civ Struct Health Monit 2021;11 
(1):189–204. 
[19] Lazecky M, Hlavacova I, Bakon M, Sousa JJ, Perissin D, Patricio G. Bridge 
displacements monitoring using Space-Borne X-Band SAR interferometry. IEEE J- 
STARS 2017;10(1):205–10. 
[20] Qin XQ, Liao MS, Zhang L, Yang MS. Structural health and stability assessment of 
high-speed railways via thermal dilation mapping with time-series InSAR analysis. 
IEEE J STARS 2017;10(6):2999–3010. 
[21] Qin XQ, Zhang L, Yang MS, Luo M, Liao MS, Ding XL. Mapping surface deformation 
and thermal dilation of arch bridges by structure-driven multi-temporal DInSAR 
analysis. Remote Sens Environ 2018;216:71–90. 
[22] Huang SJ, Cai CZ, He XH, Li C. Comparison of the corrugated steel web composite 
box-girder and traditional girders regarding temperature field under solar 
radiation. Eng Struct 2023;291:116419. 
[23] Fan JS, Liu YF, Liu C. Experiment study and refined modeling of temperature field 
of steel-concrete composite beam bridges. Eng Struct 2021;240:112350. 
[24] Tao TY, Wang H, Zhu QX, Zou ZQ, Li J, Wang LB. Long-term temperature field of 
steel-box girder of a long-span bridge: measurement and simulation. Eng Struct 
2021;236:111924. 
[25] Xu YL, Chen B, Ng CL, Wong KY, Chan WY. Monitoring temperature effect on a 
long suspension bridge. Struct Control Health Monit 2010;17(6):632–53. 
[26] Lu Y, Li D, Wang K, Jia SW. Study on solar radiation and the extreme thermal effect 
on concrete box girder bridges. Appl Sci-Basel 2021;11(14):6332. 
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Engineering Structures 311 (2024) 118164
13
[27] Zhou LR, Xia Y, Brownjohn JMW, Koo KY. Temperature analysis of a long-span 
suspension bridge based on field monitoring and numerical simulation. J Bridge 
Eng 2016;21(1):04015027. 
[28] Xia Y, Chen B, Zhou XQ, Xu YL. Field monitoring and numerical analysis of Tsing 
MA Suspension Bridge Temperature Behavior. Struct Control Health Monit 2013; 
20(4):560–75. 
[29] Tom´e ES, Pimentel M, Figueiras J. Structural response of a concrete cable-stayed 
bridge under thermal loads. Eng Struct 2018;176:652–72. 
[30] Xia Q, Liu SL, Zhang J. Temperature analysis of a long-span suspension bridge 
based on a time-varying solar radiation model. Smart Struct Syst 2020;25(1): 
23–35. 
[31] Fan JS, Li BL, Liu C, Liu YF. An efficient model for simulation of temperature field 
of steel-concrete composite beam bridges. Structures 2022;43:1868–80. 
[32] Wang ZW, Zhang WM, Zhang YF, Liu Z. Temperature prediction of flat steel box 
girders of long-span bridges utilizing in situ environmental parameters and 
machine learning. J Bridge Eng 2022;27(3):04022004. 
[33] Xia Q, Wu WL, Li FN, Zhou XQ, XuYL, Xia Y. Temperature behaviors of an arch 
bridge through integration of field monitoring and unified numerical simulation. 
Adv Struct Eng 2022;25(16):3492–509. 
[34] Li LF, Shan YS, Jing Q, Yan Y, Xia ZL, Xia Y. Global temperature behavior 
monitoring and analysis of a three-tower cable-stayed bridge. Eng Struct 2023;295: 
116855. 
[35] Abid SR, Tayi N, Zaka M. Experimental analysis of temperature gradients in 
concrete box-girders. Constr Build Mater 2016;106:523–32. 
[36] Lu HL, Hao J, Zhong JW, Wang YF, Yang HY. Analysis of sunshine temperature 
field of steel box girder based on monitoring data. Adv Civ Eng 2020;2020(3): 
9572602. 
[37] Ferretti A, Prati C, Rocca F. Permanent scatterers in SAR interferometry. IEEE 
Trans Geosci Remote Sens 2001;39(1):8–20. 
[38] Hooper A, Bekaert D, Spaans K, Arikan M. Recent advances in SAR interferometry 
time series analysis for measuring crustal deformation. Tectonophysics 2012;514: 
1–13. 
[39] Elbadry MM, Ghali A. Temperature variations in concrete bridges. J Struct Eng 
1983;109(10):2355–74. 
[40] Branco FA, Mendes PA. Thermal actions for concrete bridge design. J Struct Eng 
1993;119(8):2313–31. 
[41] Nalder IA, Wein RW. Spatial interpolation of climatic normals: test of a new 
method in the Canadian boreal forest. Agr Meteor 1998;92(4):211–25. 
[42] Cressie N. The origins of kriging. Math Geol 1990;22(3):239–52. 
[43] Xia CY, Zhong TY. Numerical analysis of the Nanjing Dashengguan Yangtze River 
Bridge subjected to non-uniform seismic excitations. J Mech Sci Technol 2011;25 
(5):1297–306. 
[44] Zhao HW, Ding YL, Nagarajaiah S, Li AQ. Longitudinal displacement behavior and 
girder end reliability of a jointless steel-truss arch railway bridge during operation. 
Appl Sci 2019;9(11):2222. 
[45] Ding YL, Wang GX, Sun P, Wu LY, Yue Q. Long-term structural health monitoring 
system for a high-speed railway bridge structure. Sci World J 2015;2015:250562. 
[46] Wang GX, Ding YL, Song YS, Wu LY, Yue Q, Mao GH. Detection and location of the 
degraded bearings based on monitoring the longitudinal expansion performance of 
the main girder of the Dashengguan Yangtze Bridge. J Perform Constr Fac 2016;30 
(4):04015074. 
[47] Wang GX, Zhou X, Ding YL, Liu XW. Long-term monitoring of temperature 
differences in a steel truss bridge with two-layer decks compared with bridge. 
J Bridge Eng 2021;26(3):05020013. 
[48] Zhou LR, Liang CF, Chen L, Xia Y. Numerical simulation method of thermal 
analysis for bridges without using field measurements. In: Proceedings of the sixth 
international workshop on performance, protection and strengthening of structures 
under extreme loading (PROTECT). CHN: Guangzhou; 2017. 
[49] Carboni B, Lacarbonara W. A three-dimensional continuum approach to the 
thermoselasto- dynamics of large-scale structures. Eng Struct 2012;40:155–67. 
[50] Ali MA, Shimoda M. On multiphysics concurrent multiscale topology optimization 
for designing porous heat-activated compliant mechanism under convection for 
additive manufacture. Eng Struct 2023;294:116756. 
Y. Zhou et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
